	CHAPTER I
	"Well, Prince, so Genoa and Lucca are now just family estates of theuonapartes. But I warn you, if you don't tell me that this means war,f you still try to defend the infamies and horrors perpetrated byhat Antichrist- I really believe he is Antichrist- I will haveothing more to do with you and you are no longer my friend, no longery 'faithful slave,' as you call yourself! But how do you do? I see have frightened you- sit down and tell me all the news."
	It was in July, 1805, and the speaker was the well-known Annaavlovna Scherer, maid of honor and favorite of the Empress Maryaedorovna. With these words she greeted Prince Vasili Kuragin, a manf high rank and importance, who was the first to arrive at hereception. Anna Pavlovna had had a cough for some days. She was, ashe said, suffering from la grippe; grippe being then a new word int. Petersburg, used only by the elite.
	All her invitations without exception, written in French, andelivered by a scarlet-liveried footman that morning, ran as follows:
	"If you have nothing better to do, Count [or Prince], and if therospect of spending an evening with a poor invalid is not tooerrible, I shall be very charmed to see you tonight between 7 and 10-nnette Scherer."
	"Heavens! what a virulent attack!" replied the prince, not in theeast disconcerted by this reception. He had just entered, wearingn embroidered court uniform, knee breeches, and shoes, and hadtars on his breast and a serene expression on his flat face. He spoken that refined French in which our grandfathers not only spoke buthought, and with the gentle, patronizing intonation natural to aan of importance who had grown old in society and at court. He wentp to Anna Pavlovna, kissed her hand, presenting to her his bald,cented, and shining head, and complacently seated himself on theofa.
	"First of all, dear friend, tell me how you are. Set your friend'sind at rest," said he without altering his tone, beneath theoliteness and affected sympathy of which indifference and evenrony could be discerned.
	"Can one be well while suffering morally? Can one be calm in timesike these if one has any feeling?" said Anna Pavlovna. "You aretaying the whole evening, I hope?"
	"And the fete at the English ambassador's? Today is Wednesday. Iust put in an appearance there," said the prince. "My daughter isoming for me to take me there."
	"I thought today's fete had been canceled. I confess all theseestivities and fireworks are becoming wearisome."
	"If they had known that you wished it, the entertainment wouldave been put off," said the prince, who, like a wound-up clock, byorce of habit said things he did not even wish to be believed.
	"Don't tease! Well, and what has been decided about Novosiltsev'sispatch? You know everything."
	"What can one say about it?" replied the prince in a cold,istless tone. "What has been decided? They have decided thatuonaparte has burnt his boats, and I believe that we are ready tourn ours."
	Prince Vasili always spoke languidly, like an actor repeating atale part. Anna Pavlovna Scherer on the contrary, despite her fortyears, overflowed with animation and impulsiveness. To be annthusiast had become her social vocation and, sometimes even when sheid not feel like it, she became enthusiastic in order not toisappoint the expectations of those who knew her. The subdued smilehich, though it did not suit her faded features, always playedound her lips expressed, as in a spoiled child, a continualonsciousness of her charming defect, which she neither wished, norould, nor considered it necessary, to correct.
	In the midst of a conversation on political matters Anna Pavlovnaurst out:
	"Oh, don't speak to me of Austria. Perhaps I don't understandhings, but Austria never has wished, and does not wish, for war.he is betraying us! Russia alone must save Europe. Our graciousovereign recognizes his high vocation and will be true to it. That ishe one thing I have faith in! Our good and wonderful sovereign has toerform the noblest role on earth, and he is so virtuous and noblehat God will not forsake him. He will fulfill his vocation andrush the hydra of revolution, which has become more terrible thanver in the person of this murderer and villain! We alone mustvenge the blood of the just one.... Whom, I ask you, can we relyn?... England with her commercial spirit will not and cannotnderstand the Emperor Alexander's loftiness of soul. She hasefused to evacuate Malta. She wanted to find, and still seeks, someecret motive in our actions. What answer did Novosiltsev get? None.he English have not understood and cannot understand theelf-abnegation of our Emperor who wants nothing for himself, but onlyesires the good of mankind. And what have they promised? Nothing! Andhat little they have promised they will not perform! Prussia haslways declared that Buonaparte is invincible, and that all Europes powerless before him.... And I don't believe a word that Hardenburgays, or Haugwitz either. This famous Prussian neutrality is just arap. I have faith only in God and the lofty destiny of our adoredonarch. He will save Europe!"
	She suddenly paused, smiling at her own impetuosity.
	"I think," said the prince with a smile, "that if you had beenent instead of our dear Wintzingerode you would have captured theing of Prussia's consent by assault. You are so eloquent. Will youive me a cup of tea?"
	"In a moment. A propos," she added, becoming calm again, "I amxpecting two very interesting men tonight, le Vicomte de Mortemart,ho is connected with the Montmorencys through the Rohans, one ofhe best French families. He is one of the genuine emigres, the goodnes. And also the Abbe Morio. Do you know that profound thinker? Heas been received by the Emperor. Had you heard?"
	"I shall be delighted to meet them," said the prince. "But tell me,"e added with studied carelessness as if it had only just occurredo him, though the question he was about to ask was the chief motivef his visit, "is it true that the Dowager Empress wants Baron Funkeo be appointed first secretary at Vienna? The baron by all accountss a poor creature."
	Prince Vasili wished to obtain this post for his son, but othersere trying through the Dowager Empress Marya Fedorovna to secure itor the baron.
	Anna Pavlovna almost closed her eyes to indicate that neither sheor anyone else had a right to criticize what the Empress desired oras pleased with.
	"Baron Funke has been recommended to the Dowager Empress by herister," was all she said, in a dry and mournful tone.
	As she named the Empress, Anna Pavlovna's face suddenly assumed anxpression of profound and sincere devotion and respect mingled withadness, and this occurred every time she mentioned her illustriousatroness. She added that Her Majesty had deigned to show Baronunke beaucoup d'estime, and again her face clouded over with sadness.
	The prince was silent and looked indifferent. But, with theomanly and courtierlike quickness and tact habitual to her, Annaavlovna wished both to rebuke him (for daring to speak he had done of man recommended to the Empress) and at the same time to console him,o she said:
	"Now about your family. Do you know that since your daughter cameut everyone has been enraptured by her? They say she is amazinglyeautiful."
	The prince bowed to signify his respect and gratitude.
	"I often think," she continued after a short pause, drawing nearero the prince and smiling amiably at him as if to show thatolitical and social topics were ended and the time had come forntimate conversation- "I often think how unfairly sometimes theoys of life are distributed. Why has fate given you two such splendidhildren? I don't speak of Anatole, your youngest. I don't likeim," she added in a tone admitting of no rejoinder and raising heryebrows. "Two such charming children. And really you appreciatehem less than anyone, and so you don't deserve to have them."
	And she smiled her ecstatic smile.
	"I can't help it," said the prince. "Lavater would have said Iack the bump of paternity."
	"Don't joke; I mean to have a serious talk with you. Do you know Im dissatisfied with your younger son? Between ourselves" (and herace assumed its melancholy expression), "he was mentioned at Herajesty's and you were pitied...."
	The prince answered nothing, but she looked at him significantly,waiting a reply. He frowned.
	"What would you have me do?" he said at last. "You know I did all father could for their education, and they have both turned outools. Hippolyte is at least a quiet fool, but Anatole is an activene. That is the only difference between them." He said this smilingn a way more natural and animated than usual, so that the wrinklesound his mouth very clearly revealed something unexpectedly coarsend unpleasant.
	"And why are children born to such men as you? If you were not aather there would be nothing I could reproach you with," said Annaavlovna, looking up pensively.
	"I am your faithful slave and to you alone I can confess that myhildren are the bane of my life. It is the cross I have to bear. Thats how I explain it to myself. It can't be helped!"
	He said no more, but expressed his resignation to cruel fate by aesture. Anna Pavlovna meditated.
	"Have you never thought of marrying your prodigal son Anatole?"he asked. "They say old maids have a mania for matchmaking, andhough I don't feel that weakness in myself as yet,I know a littleerson who is very unhappy with her father. She is a relation ofours, Princess Mary Bolkonskaya."
	Prince Vasili did not reply, though, with the quickness of memorynd perception befitting a man of the world, he indicated by aovement of the head that he was considering this information.
	"Do you know," he said at last, evidently unable to check the sadurrent of his thoughts, "that Anatole is costing me forty thousandubles a year? And," he went on after a pause, "what will it be inive years, if he goes on like this?" Presently he added: "That's whate fathers have to put up with.... Is this princess of yours rich?"
	"Her father is very rich and stingy. He lives in the country. Hes the well-known Prince Bolkonski who had to retire from the armynder the late Emperor, and was nicknamed 'the King of Prussia.' He isery clever but eccentric, and a bore. The poor girl is verynhappy. She has a brother; I think you know him, he married Liseeinen lately. He is an aide-de-camp of Kutuzov's and will be hereonight."
	"Listen, dear Annette," said the prince, suddenly taking Annaavlovna's hand and for some reason drawing it downwards. "Arrangehat affair for me and I shall always be your most devoted slave-lafe wigh an f, as a village elder of mine writes in his reports. Shes rich and of good family and that's all I want."
	And with the familiarity and easy grace peculiar to him, he raisedhe maid of honor's hand to his lips, kissed it, and swung it to andro as he lay back in his armchair, looking in another direction.
	"Attendez," said Anna Pavlovna, reflecting, "I'll speak to Lise,oung Bolkonski's wife, this very evening, and perhaps the thing cane arranged. It shall be on your family's behalf that I'll start mypprenticeship as old maid."BK1|CH2
	CHAPTER II
	Anna Pavlovna's drawing room was gradually filling. The highestetersburg society was assembled there: people differing widely in agend character but alike in the social circle to which they belonged.rince Vasili's daughter, the beautiful Helene, came to take herather to the ambassador's entertainment; she wore a ball dress ander badge as maid of honor. The youthful little Princessolkonskaya, known as la femme la plus seduisante de Petersbourg,* waslso there. She had been married during the previous winter, and beingregnant did not go to any large gatherings, but only to smalleceptions. Prince Vasili's son, Hippolyte, had come with Mortemart,hom he introduced. The Abbe Morio and many others had also come.
	*The most fascinating woman in Petersburg.
	To each new arrival Anna Pavlovna said, "You have not yet seen myunt," or "You do not know my aunt?" and very gravely conducted him orer to a little old lady, wearing large bows of ribbon in her cap, whoad come sailing in from another room as soon as the guests began torrive; and slowly turning her eyes from the visitor to her aunt, Annaavlovna mentioned each one's name and then left them.
	Each visitor performed the ceremony of greeting this old aunt whomot one of them knew, not one of them wanted to know, and not one ofhem cared about; Anna Pavlovna observed these greetings with mournfulnd solemn interest and silent approval. The aunt spoke to each ofhem in the same words, about their health and her own, and the healthf Her Majesty, "who, thank God, was better today." And eachisitor, though politeness prevented his showing impatience, lefthe old woman with a sense of relief at having performed a vexatiousuty and did not return to her the whole evening.
	The young Princess Bolkonskaya had brought some work in aold-embroidered velvet bag. Her pretty little upper lip, on which aelicate dark down was just perceptible, was too short for hereeth, but it lifted all the more sweetly, and was especially charminghen she occasionally drew it down to meet the lower lip. As is alwayshe case with a thoroughly attractive woman, her defect- the shortnessf her upper lip and her half-open mouth- seemed to be her own specialnd peculiar form of beauty. Everyone brightened at the sight ofhis pretty young woman, so soon to become a mother, so full of lifend health, and carrying her burden so lightly. Old men and dullispirited young ones who looked at her, after being in her companynd talking to her a little while, felt as if they too wereecoming, like her, full of life and health. All who talked to her,nd at each word saw her bright smile and the constant gleam of herhite teeth, thought that they were in a specially amiable mood thatay.
	The little princess went round the table with quick, short,waying steps, her workbag on her arm, and gaily spreading out herress sat down on a sofa near the silver samovar, as if all she wasoing was a pleasure to herself and to all around her. "I have broughty work," said she in French, displaying her bag and addressing allresent. "Mind, Annette, I hope you have not played a wicked trickn me," she added, turning to her hostess. "You wrote that it was toe quite a small reception, and just see how badly I am dressed."nd she spread out her arms to show her short-waisted, lace-trimmed,ainty gray dress, girdled with a broad ribbon just below the breast.
	"Soyez tranquille, Lise, you will always be prettier than anyonelse," replied Anna Pavlovna.
	"You know," said the princess in the same tone of voice and still inrench, turning to a general, "my husband is deserting me? He is goingo get himself killed. Tell me what this wretched war is for?" shedded, addressing Prince Vasili, and without waiting for an answer sheurned to speak to his daughter, the beautiful Helene.
	"What a delightful woman this little princess is!" said Princeasili to Anna Pavlovna.
	One of the next arrivals was a stout, heavily built young man withlose-cropped hair, spectacles, the light-colored breeches fashionablet that time, a very high ruffle, and a brown dress coat. This stoutoung man was an illegitimate son of Count Bezukhov, a well-knownrandee of Catherine's time who now lay dying in Moscow. The young manad not yet entered either the military or civil service, as he hadnly just returned from abroad where he had been educated, and thisas his first appearance in society. Anna Pavlovna greeted him withhe nod she accorded to the lowest hierarchy in her drawing room.ut in spite of this lowest-grade greeting, a look of anxiety andear, as at the sight of something too large and unsuited to thelace, came over her face when she saw Pierre enter. Though he wasertainly rather bigger than the other men in the room, her anxietyould only have reference to the clever though shy, but observantnd natural, expression which distinguished him from everyone elsen that drawing room.
	"It is very good of you, Monsieur Pierre, to come and visit a poornvalid," said Anna Pavlovna, exchanging an alarmed glance with herunt as she conducted him to her.
	Pierre murmured something unintelligible, and continued to lookound as if in search of something. On his way to the aunt he bowed tohe little princess with a pleased smile, as to an intimatecquaintance.
	Anna Pavlovna's alarm was justified, for Pierre turned away from theunt without waiting to hear her speech about Her Majesty's health.nna Pavlovna in dismay detained him with the words: "Do you knowhe Abbe Morio? He is a most interesting man."
	"Yes, I have heard of his scheme for perpetual peace, and it is verynteresting but hardly feasible."
	"You think so?" rejoined Anna Pavlovna in order to say something andet away to attend to her duties as hostess. But Pierre nowommitted a reverse act of impoliteness. First he had left a ladyefore she had finished speaking to him, and now he continued to speako another who wished to get away. With his head bent, and his bigeet spread apart, he began explaining his reasons for thinking thebbe's plan chimerical.
	"We will talk of it later," said Anna Pavlovna with a smile.
	And having got rid of this young man who did not know how to behave,he resumed her duties as hostess and continued to listen and watch,eady to help at any point where the conversation might happen tolag. As the foreman of a spinning mill, when he has set the handso work, goes round and notices here a spindle that has stopped orhere one that creaks or makes more noise than it should, andastens to check the machine or set it in proper motion, so Annaavlovna moved about her drawing room, approaching now a silent, now aoo-noisy group, and by a word or slight rearrangement kept theonversational machine in steady, proper, and regular motion. But amidhese cares her anxiety about Pierre was evident. She kept annxious watch on him when he approached the group round Mortemart toisten to what was being said there, and again when he passed tonother group whose center was the abbe.
	Pierre had been educated abroad, and this reception at Annaavlovna's was the first he had attended in Russia. He knew that allhe intellectual lights of Petersburg were gathered there and, like child in a toyshop, did not know which way to look, afraid ofissing any clever conversation that was to be heard. Seeing theelf-confident and refined expression on the faces of those present heas always expecting to hear something very profound. At last heame up to Morio. Here the conversation seemed interesting and hetood waiting for an opportunity to express his own views, as youngeople are fond of doing.BK1|CH3
	CHAPTER III
	Anna Pavlovna's reception was in full swing. The spindles hummedteadily and ceaselessly on all sides. With the exception of the aunt,eside whom sat only one elderly lady, who with her thin careworn faceas rather out of place in this brilliant society, the whole companyad settled into three groups. One, chiefly masculine, had formedound the abbe. Another, of young people, was grouped round theeautiful Princess Helene, Prince Vasili's daughter, and the littlerincess Bolkonskaya, very pretty and rosy, though rather too plumpor her age. The third group was gathered round Mortemart and Annaavlovna.
	The vicomte was a nice-looking young man with soft features andolished manners, who evidently considered himself a celebrity but outf politeness modestly placed himself at the disposal of the circle inhich he found himself. Anna Pavlovna was obviously serving him ups a treat to her guests. As a clever maitre d'hotel serves up as apecially choice delicacy a piece of meat that no one who had seent in the kitchen would have cared to eat, so Anna Pavlovna servedp to her guests, first the vicomte and then the abbe, as peculiarlyhoice morsels. The group about Mortemart immediately began discussinghe murder of the Duc d'Enghien. The vicomte said that the Duc'Enghien had perished by his own magnanimity, and that there werearticular reasons for Buonaparte's hatred of him.
	"Ah, yes! Do tell us all about it, Vicomte," said Anna Pavlovna,ith a pleasant feeling that there was something a la Louis XV inhe sound of that sentence: "Contez nous cela, Vicomte."
	The vicomte bowed and smiled courteously in token of his willingnesso comply. Anna Pavlovna arranged a group round him, inviting everyoneo listen to his tale.
	"The vicomte knew the duc personally," whispered Anna Pavlovna to ofhe guests. "The vicomte is a wonderful raconteur," said she tonother. "How evidently he belongs to the best society," said she to ahird; and the vicomte was served up to the company in the choicestnd most advantageous style, like a well-garnished joint of roast beefn a hot dish.
	The vicomte wished to begin his story and gave a subtle smile.
	"Come over here, Helene, dear," said Anna Pavlovna to theeautiful young princess who was sitting some way off, the center ofnother group.
	The princess smiled. She rose with the same unchanging smile withhich she had first entered the room- the smile of a perfectlyeautiful woman. With a slight rustle of her white dress trimmedith moss and ivy, with a gleam of white shoulders, glossy hair, andparkling diamonds, she passed between the men who made way for her,ot looking at any of them but smiling on all, as if graciouslyllowing each the privilege of admiring her beautiful figure andhapely shoulders, back, and bosom- which in the fashion of those daysere very much exposed- and she seemed to bring the glamour of aallroom with her as she moved toward Anna Pavlovna. Helene was soovely that not only did she not show any trace of coquetry, but onhe contrary she even appeared shy of her unquestionable and all tooictorious beauty. She seemed to wish, but to be unable, to diminishts effect.
	"How lovely!" said everyone who saw her; and the vicomte liftedis shoulders and dropped his eyes as if startled by somethingxtraordinary when she took her seat opposite and beamed upon him alsoith her unchanging smile.
	"Madame, I doubt my ability before such an audience," said he,milingly inclining his head.
	The princess rested her bare round arm on a little table andonsidered a reply unnecessary. She smilingly waited. All the time thetory was being told she sat upright, glancing now at her beautifulound arm, altered in shape by its pressure on the table, now at hertill more beautiful bosom, on which she readjusted a diamondecklace. From time to time she smoothed the folds of her dress, andhenever the story produced an effect she glanced at Anna Pavlovna, atnce adopted just the expression she saw on the maid of honor'sace, and again relapsed into her radiant smile.
	The little princess had also left the tea table and followed Helene.
	"Wait a moment, I'll get my work.... Now then, what are you thinkingf?" she went on, turning to Prince Hippolyte. "Fetch me my workbag."
	There was a general movement as the princess, smiling and talkingerrily to everyone at once, sat down and gaily arranged herself iner seat.
	"Now I am all right," she said, and asking the vicomte to begin, sheook up her work.
	Prince Hippolyte, having brought the workbag, joined the circlend moving a chair close to hers seated himself beside her.
	Le charmant Hippolyte was surprising by his extraordinaryesemblance to his beautiful sister, but yet more by the fact thatn spite of this resemblance he was exceedingly ugly. His featuresere like his sister's, but while in her case everything was lit up by joyous, self-satisfied, youthful, and constant smile of animation,nd by the wonderful classic beauty of her figure, his face on theontrary was dulled by imbecility and a constant expression ofullen self-confidence, while his body was thin and weak. His eyes,ose, and mouth all seemed puckered into a vacant, wearied grimace,nd his arms and legs always fell into unnatural positions.
	"It's not going to be a ghost story?" said he, sitting down besidehe princess and hastily adjusting his lorgnette, as if without thisnstrument he could not begin to speak.
	"Why no, my dear fellow," said the astonished narrator, shruggingis shoulders.
	"Because I hate ghost stories," said Prince Hippolyte in a tonehich showed that he only understood the meaning of his words after head uttered them.
	He spoke with such self-confidence that his hearers could not beure whether what he said was very witty or very stupid. He wasressed in a dark-green dress coat, knee breeches of the color ofuisse de nymphe effrayee, as he called it, shoes, and silk stockings.
	The vicomte told his tale very neatly. It was an anecdote, thenurrent, to the effect that the Duc d'Enghien had gone secretly toaris to visit Mademoiselle George; that at her house he came upononaparte, who also enjoyed the famous actress' favors, and that inis presence Napoleon happened to fall into one of the fainting fitso which he was subject, and was thus at the duc's mercy. The latterpared him, and this magnanimity Bonaparte subsequently repaid byeath.
	The story was very pretty and interesting, especially at the pointhere the rivals suddenly recognized one another; and the ladiesooked agitated.
	"Charming!" said Anna Pavlovna with an inquiring glance at theittle princess.
	"Charming!" whispered the little princess, sticking the needlento her work as if to testify that the interest and fascination ofhe story prevented her from going on with it.
	The vicomte appreciated this silent praise and smiling gratefullyrepared to continue, but just then Anna Pavlovna, who had kept aatchful eye on the young man who so alarmed her, noticed that heas talking too loudly and vehemently with the abbe, so she hurried tohe rescue. Pierre had managed to start a conversation with the abbebout the balance of power, and the latter, evidently interested byhe young man's simple-minded eagerness, was explaining his petheory. Both were talking and listening too eagerly and too naturally,hich was why Anna Pavlovna disapproved.
	"The means are... the balance of power in Europe and the rights ofhe people," the abbe was saying. "It is only necessary for oneowerful nation like Russia- barbaric as she is said to be- to placeerself disinterestedly at the head of an alliance having for itsbject the maintenance of the balance of power of Europe, and it wouldave the world!"
	"But how are you to get that balance?" Pierre was beginning.
	At that moment Anna Pavlovna came up and, looking severely atierre, asked the Italian how he stood Russian climate. Thetalian's face instantly changed and assumed an offensivelyffected, sugary expression, evidently habitual to him when conversingith women.
	"I am so enchanted by the brilliancy of the wit and culture of theociety, more especially of the feminine society, in which I havead the honor of being received, that I have not yet had time to thinkf the climate," said he.
	Not letting the abbe and Pierre escape, Anna Pavlovna, the moreonveniently to keep them under observation, brought them into thearger circle.BK1|CH4
	CHAPTER IV
	Just them another visitor entered the drawing room: Prince Andrewolkonski, the little princess' husband. He was a very handsomeoung man, of medium height, with firm, clearcut features.verything about him, from his weary, bored expression to his quiet,easured step, offered a most striking contrast to his quiet, littleife. It was evident that he not only knew everyone in the drawingoom, but had found them to be so tiresome that it wearied him to lookt or listen to them. And among all these faces that he found soedious, none seemed to bore him so much as that of his pretty wife.e turned away from her with a grimace that distorted his handsomeace, kissed Anna Pavlovna's hand, and screwing up his eyes scannedhe whole company.
	"You are off to the war, Prince?" said Anna Pavlovna.
	"General Kutuzov," said Bolkonski, speaking French and stressing theast syllable of the general's name like a Frenchman, "has beenleased to take me as an aide-de-camp...."
	"And Lise, your wife?"
	"She will go to the country."
	"Are you not ashamed to deprive us of your charming wife?"
	"Andre," said his wife, addressing her husband in the sameoquettish manner in which she spoke to other men, "the vicomte haseen telling us such a tale about Mademoiselle George and Buonaparte!"
	Prince Andrew screwed up his eyes and turned away. Pierre, whorom the moment Prince Andrew entered the room had watched him withlad, affectionate eyes, now came up and took his arm. Before heooked round Prince Andrew frowned again, expressing his annoyanceith whoever was touching his arm, but when he saw Pierre's beamingace he gave him an unexpectedly kind and pleasant smile.
	"There now!... So you, too, are in the great world?" said he toierre.
	"I knew you would be here," replied Pierre. "I will come to supperith you. May I?" he added in a low voice so as not to disturb theicomte who was continuing his story.
	"No, impossible!" said Prince Andrew, laughing and pressing Pierre'sand to show that there was no need to ask the question. He wishedo say something more, but at that moment Prince Vasili and hisaughter got up to go and the two young men rose to let them pass.
	"You must excuse me, dear Vicomte," said Prince Vasili to therenchman, holding him down by the sleeve in a friendly way to preventis rising. "This unfortunate fete at the ambassador's deprives mef a pleasure, and obliges me to interrupt you. I am very sorry toeave your enchanting party," said he, turning to Anna Pavlovna.
	His daughter, Princess Helene, passed between the chairs, lightlyolding up the folds of her dress, and the smile shone still moreadiantly on her beautiful face. Pierre gazed at her with rapturous,lmost frightened, eyes as she passed him.
	"Very lovely," said Prince Andrew.
	"Very," said Pierre.
	In passing Prince Vasili seized Pierre's hand and said to Annaavlovna: "Educate this bear for me! He has been staying with me ahole month and this is the first time I have seen him in society.othing is so necessary for a young man as the society of cleveromen."
	Anna Pavlovna smiled and promised to take Pierre in hand. She knewis father to be a connection of Prince Vasili's. The elderly lady whoad been sitting with the old aunt rose hurriedly and overtookrince Vasili in the anteroom. All the affectation of interest she hadssumed had left her kindly and tearworn face and it now expressednly anxiety and fear.
	"How about my son Boris, Prince?" said she, hurrying after himnto the anteroom. "I can't remain any longer in Petersburg. Tell mehat news I may take back to my poor boy."
	Although Prince Vasili listened reluctantly and not very politely tohe elderly lady, even betraying some impatience, she gave him anngratiating and appealing smile, and took his hand that he mightot go away.
	"What would it cost you to say a word to the Emperor, and then heould be transferred to the Guards at once?" said she.
	"Believe me, Princess, I am ready to do all I can," answeredrince Vasili, "but it is difficult for me to ask the Emperor. Ihould advise you to appeal to Rumyantsev through Prince Golitsyn.hat would be the best way."
	The elderly lady was a Princess Drubetskaya, belonging to one of theest families in Russia, but she was poor, and having long been out ofociety had lost her former influential connections. She had nowome to Petersburg to procure an appointment in the Guards for hernly son. It was, in fact, solely to meet Prince Vasili that she hadbtained an invitation to Anna Pavlovna's reception and had satistening to the vicomte's story. Prince Vasili's words frighteneder, an embittered look clouded her once handsome face, but only for aoment; then she smiled again and dutched Prince Vasili's arm moreightly.
	"Listen to me, Prince," said she. "I have never yet asked you fornything and I never will again, nor have I ever reminded you of myather's friendship for you; but now I entreat you for God's sake too this for my son- and I shall always regard you as a benefactor,"he added hurriedly. "No, don't be angry, but promise! I have askedolitsyn and he has refused. Be the kindhearted man you alwaysere," she said, trying to smile though tears were in her eyes.
	"Papa, we shall be late," said Princess Helene, turning hereautiful head and looking over her classically molded shoulder as shetood waiting by the door.
	Influence in society, however, is a capital which has to beconomized if it is to last. Prince Vasili knew this, and havingnce realized that if he asked on behalf of all who begged of him,e would soon be unable to ask for himself, he became chary of usingis influence. But in Princess Drubetskaya's case he felt, after herecond appeal, something like qualms of conscience. She had remindedim of what was quite true; he had been indebted to her father for theirst steps in his career. Moreover, he could see by her mannershat she was one of those women- mostly mothers- who, having once madep their minds, will not rest until they have gained their end, andre prepared if necessary to go on insisting day after day and hourfter hour, and even to make scenes. This last consideration movedim.
	"My dear Anna Mikhaylovna," said he with his usual familiarity andeariness of tone, "it is almost impossible for me to do what you ask;ut to prove my devotion to you and how I respect your father'semory, I will do the impossible- your son shall be transferred to theuards. Here is my hand on it. Are you satisfied?"
	"My dear benefactor! This is what I expected from you- I knew yourindness!" He turned to go.
	"Wait- just a word! When he has been transferred to the Guards..."he faltered. "You are on good terms with Michael Ilarionovichutuzov... recommend Boris to him as adjutant! Then I shall be atest, and then..."
	Prince Vasili smiled.
	"No, I won't promise that. You don't know how Kutuzov is pesteredince his appointment as Commander in Chief. He told me himself thatll the Moscow ladies have conspired to give him all their sons asdjutants."
	"No, but do promise! I won't let you go! My dear benefactor..."
	"Papa," said his beautiful daughter in the same tone as before,we shall be late."
	"Well, au revoir! Good-by! You hear her?"
	"Then tomorrow you will speak to the Emperor?"
	"Certainly; but about Kutuzov, I don't promise."
	"Do promise, do promise, Vasili!" cried Anna Mikhaylovna as he went,ith the smile of a coquettish girl, which at one time probably cameaturally to her, but was now very ill-suited to her careworn face.
	Apparently she had forgotten her age and by force of habitmployed all the old feminine arts. But as soon as the prince had goneer face resumed its former cold, artificial expression. Sheeturned to the group where the vicomte was still talking, and againretended to listen, while waiting till it would be time to leave. Herask was accomplished.BK1|CH5
	CHAPTER V
	"And what do you think of this latest comedy, the coronation atilan?" asked Anna Pavlovna, "and of the comedy of the people of Genoand Lucca laying their petitions before Monsieur Buonaparte, andonsieur Buonaparte sitting on a throne and granting the petitionsf the nations? Adorable! It is enough to make one's head whirl! It iss if the whole world had gone crazy."
	Prince Andrew looked Anna Pavlovna straight in the face with aarcastic smile.
	"'Dieu me la donne, gare a qui la touche!'* They say he was veryine when he said that," he remarked, repeating the words intalian: "'Dio mi l'ha dato. Guai a chi la tocchi!'"
	*God has given it to me, let him who touches it beware!
	"I hope this will prove the last drop that will make the glass runver," Anna Pavlovna continued. "The sovereigns will not be able tondure this man who is a menace to everything."
	"The sovereigns? I do not speak of Russia," said the vicomte, politeut hopeless: "The sovereigns, madame... What have they done for LouisVII, for the Queen, or for Madame Elizabeth? Nothing!" and heecame more animated. "And believe me, they are reaping the rewardf their betrayal of the Bourbon cause. The sovereigns! Why, theyre sending ambassadors to compliment the usurper."
	And sighing disdainfully, he again changed his position.
	Prince Hippolyte, who had been gazing at the vicomte for some timehrough his lorgnette, suddenly turned completely round toward theittle princess, and having asked for a needle began tracing the Condeoat of arms on the table. He explained this to her with as muchravity as if she had asked him to do it.
	"Baton de gueules, engrele de gueules d' azur- maison Conde," saide.
	The princess listened, smiling.
	"If Buonaparte remains on the throne of France a year longer," theicomte continued, with the air of a man who, in a matter with whiche is better acquainted than anyone else, does not listen to othersut follows the current of his own thoughts, "things will have goneoo far. By intrigues, violence, exile, and executions, Frenchociety- I mean good French society- will have been forever destroyed,nd then..."
	He shrugged his shoulders and spread out his hands. Pierre wished toake a remark, for the conversation interested him, but Anna Pavlovna,ho had him under observation, interrupted:
	"The Emperor Alexander," said she, with the melancholy whichlways accompanied any reference of hers to the Imperial family,has declared that he will leave it to the French people themselves tohoose their own form of government; and I believe that once free fromhe usurper, the whole nation will certainly throw itself into therms of its rightful king," she concluded, trying to be amiable to theoyalist emigrant.
	"That is doubtful," said Prince Andrew. "Monsieur le Vicomte quiteightly supposes that matters have already gone too far. I think itill be difficult to return to the old regime."
	"From what I have heard," said Pierre, blushing and breaking intohe conversation, "almost all the aristocracy has already gone over toonaparte's side."
	"It is the Buonapartists who say that," replied the vicomteithout looking at Pierre. "At the present time it is difficult tonow the real state of French public opinion.
	"Bonaparte has said so," remarked Prince Andrew with a sarcasticmile.
	It was evident that he did not like the vicomte and was aiming hisemarks at him, though without looking at him.
	"'I showed them the path to glory, but they did not follow it,'"rince Andrew continued after a short silence, again quotingapoleon's words. "'I opened my antechambers and they crowded in.' Io not know how far he was justified in saying so."
	"Not in the least," replied the vicomte. "After the murder of theuc even the most partial ceased to regard him as a hero. If to someeople," he went on, turning to Anna Pavlovna, "he ever was a hero,fter the murder of the duc there was one martyr more in heaven andne hero less on earth."
	Before Anna Pavlovna and the others had time to smile theirppreciation of the vicomte's epigram, Pierre again broke into theonversation, and though Anna Pavlovna felt sure he would sayomething inappropriate, she was unable to stop him.
	"The execution of the Duc d'Enghien," declared Monsieur Pierre, "was political necessity, and it seems to me that Napoleon showedreatness of soul by not fearing to take on himself the wholeesponsibility of that deed."
	"Dieu! Mon Dieu!" muttered Anna Pavlovna in a terrified whisper.
	"What, Monsieur Pierre... Do you consider that assassination showsreatness of soul?" said the little princess, smiling and drawinger work nearer to her.
	"Oh! Oh!" exclaimed several voices.
	"Capital!" said Prince Hippolyte in English, and began slappingis knee with the palm of his hand.
	The vicomte merely shrugged his shoulders. Pierre looked solemnly atis audience over his spectacles and continued.
	"I say so," he continued desperately, "because the Bourbons fledrom the Revolution leaving the people to anarchy, and Napoleonlone understood the Revolution and quelled it, and so for the generalood, he could not stop short for the sake of one man's life."
	"Won't you come over to the other table?" suggested Anna Pavlovna.
	But Pierre continued his speech without heeding her.
	"No," cried he, becoming more and more eager, "Napoleon is greatecause he rose superior to the Revolution, suppressed its abuses,reserved all that was good in it- equality of citizenship and freedomf speech and of the press- and only for that reason did he obtainower."
	"Yes, if having obtained power, without availing himself of it toommit murder he had restored it to the rightful king, I should havealled him a great man," remarked the vicomte.
	"He could not do that. The people only gave him power that height rid them of the Bourbons and because they saw that he was areat man. The Revolution was a grand thing!" continued Monsieurierre, betraying by this desperate and provocative proposition hisxtreme youth and his wish to express all that was in his mind.
	"What? Revolution and regicide a grand thing?... Well, after that...ut won't you come to this other table?" repeated Anna Pavlovna.
	"Rousseau's Contrat social," said the vicomte with a tolerant smile.
	"I am not speaking of regicide, I am speaking about ideas."
	"Yes: ideas of robbery, murder, and regicide," again interjectedn ironical voice.
	"Those were extremes, no doubt, but they are not what is mostmportant. What is important are the rights of man, emancipationrom prejudices, and equality of citizenship, and all these ideasapoleon has retained in full force."
	"Liberty and equality," said the vicomte contemptuously, as if atast deciding seriously to prove to this youth how foolish his wordsere, "high-sounding words which have long been discredited. Whooes not love liberty and equality? Even our Saviour preachediberty and equality. Have people since the Revolution become happier?n the contrary. We wanted liberty, but Buonaparte has destroyed it."
	Prince Andrew kept looking with an amused smile from Pierre to theicomte and from the vicomte to their hostess. In the first momentf Pierre's outburst Anna Pavlovna, despite her social experience, wasorror-struck. But when she saw that Pierre's sacrilegious words hadot exasperated the vicomte, and had convinced herself that it wasmpossible to stop him, she rallied her forces and joined theicomte in a vigorous attack on the orator.
	"But, my dear Monsieur Pierre," said she, "how do you explain theact of a great man executing a duc- or even an ordinary man who- isnnocent and untried?"
	"I should like," said the vicomte, "to ask how monsieur explains the8th Brumaire; was not that an imposture? It was a swindle, and not atll like the conduct of a great man!"
	"And the prisoners he killed in Africa? That was horrible!" said theittle princess, shrugging her shoulders.
	"He's a low fellow, say what you will," remarked Prince Hippolyte.
	Pierre, not knowing whom to answer, looked at them all and smiled.is smile was unlike the half-smile of other people. When he smiled,is grave, even rather gloomy, look was instantaneously replaced bynother- a childlike, kindly, even rather silly look, which seemedo ask forgiveness.
	The vicomte who was meeting him for the first time saw clearlyhat this young Jacobin was not so terrible as his words suggested.ll were silent.
	"How do you expect him to answer you all at once?" said Princendrew. "Besides, in the actions of a statesman one has to distinguishetween his acts as a private person, as a general, and as an emperor.o it seems to me."
	"Yes, yes, of course!" Pierre chimed in, pleased at the arrival ofhis reinforcement.
	"One must admit," continued Prince Andrew, "that Napoleon as a manas great on the bridge of Arcola, and in the hospital at Jaffahere he gave his hand to the plague-stricken; but... but there arether acts which it is difficult to justify."
	Prince Andrew, who had evidently wished to tone down the awkwardnessf Pierre's remarks, rose and made a sign to his wife that it was timeo go.
	Suddenly Prince Hippolyte started up making signs to everyone tottend, and asking them all to be seated began:
	"I was told a charming Moscow story today and must treat you tot. Excuse me, Vicomte- I must tell it in Russian or the point will beost...." And Prince Hippolyte began to tell his story in such Russians a Frenchman would speak after spending about a year in Russia.veryone waited, so emphatically and eagerly did he demand theirttention to his story.
	"There is in Moscow a lady, une dame, and she is very stingy. Sheust have two footmen behind her carriage, and very big ones. That waser taste. And she had a lady's maid, also big. She said..."
	Here Prince Hippolyte paused, evidently collecting his ideas withifficulty.
	"She said... Oh yes! She said, 'Girl,' to the maid, 'put on aivery, get up behind the carriage, and come with me while I make somealls.'"
	Here Prince Hippolyte spluttered and burst out laughing longefore his audience, which produced an effect unfavorable to thearrator. Several persons, among them the elderly lady and Annaavlovna, did however smile.
	"She went. Suddenly there was a great wind. The girl lost her hatnd her long hair came down...." Here he could contain himself noonger and went on, between gasps of laughter: "And the whole worldnew...."
	And so the anecdote ended. Though it was unintelligible why he hadold it, or why it had to be told in Russian, still Anna Pavlovnand the others appreciated Prince Hippolyte's social tact in sogreeably ending Pierre's unpleasant and unamiable outburst. After thenecdote the conversation broke up into insignificant small talk abouthe last and next balls, about theatricals, and who would meet whom,nd when and where.BK1|CH6
	CHAPTER VI
	Having thanked Anna Pavlovna for her charming soiree, the guestsegan to take their leave.
	Pierre was ungainly. Stout, about the average height, broad, withuge red hands; he did not know, as the saying is, to enter arawing room and still less how to leave one; that is, how to sayomething particularly agreeable before going away. Besides this heas absent-minded. When he rose to go, he took up instead of hiswn, the general's three-cornered hat, and held it, pulling at thelume, till the general asked him to restore it. All hisbsent-mindedness and inability to enter a room and converse in itas, however, redeemed by his kindly, simple, and modest expression.nna Pavlovna turned toward him and, with a Christian mildness thatxpressed forgiveness of his indiscretion, nodded and said: "I hope toee you again, but I also hope you will change your opinions, myear Monsieur Pierre."
	When she said this, he did not reply and only bowed, but againverybody saw his smile, which said nothing, unless perhaps, "Opinionsre opinions, but you see what a capital, good-natured fellow I am."nd everyone, including Anna Pavlovna, felt this.
	Prince Andrew had gone out into the hall, and, turning his shoulderso the footman who was helping him on with his cloak, listenedndifferently to his wife's chatter with Prince Hippolyte who had alsoome into the hall. Prince Hippolyte stood close to the pretty,regnant princess, and stared fixedly at her through his eyeglass.
	"Go in, Annette, or you will catch cold," said the littlerincess, taking leave of Anna Pavlovna. "It is settled," she added in low voice.
	Anna Pavlovna had already managed to speak to Lise about the matchhe contemplated between Anatole and the little princess'ister-in-law.
	"I rely on you, my dear," said Anna Pavlovna, also in a low tone.Write to her and let me know how her father looks at the matter. Auevoir!"- and she left the hall.
	Prince Hippolyte approached the little princess and, bending hisace close to her, began to whisper something.
	Two footmen, the princess' and his own, stood holding a shawl and cloak, waiting for the conversation to finish. They listened tohe French sentences which to them were meaningless, with an air ofnderstanding but not wishing to appear to do so. The princess assual spoke smilingly and listened with a laugh.
	"I am very glad I did not go to the ambassador's," said Princeippolyte "-so dull-. It has been a delightful evening, has it not?elightful!"
	"They say the ball will be very good," replied the princess, drawingp her downy little lip. "All the pretty women in society will behere."
	"Not all, for you will not be there; not all," said Prince Hippolytemiling joyfully; and snatching the shawl from the footman, whom heven pushed aside, he began wrapping it round the princess. Eitherrom awkwardness or intentionally (no one could have said which) afterhe shawl had been adjusted he kept his arm around her for a longime, as though embracing her.
	Still smiling, she gracefully moved away, turning and glancing ater husband. Prince Andrew's eyes were closed, so weary and sleepy dide seem.
	"Are you ready?" he asked his wife, looking past her.
	Prince Hippolyte hurriedly put on his cloak, which in the latestashion reached to his very heels, and, stumbling in it, ran outnto the porch following the princess, whom a footman was helping intohe carriage.
	"Princesse, au revoir," cried he, stumbling with his tongue asell as with his feet.
	The princess, picking up her dress, was taking her seat in theark carriage, her husband was adjusting his saber; Princeippolyte, under pretense of helping, was in everyone's way.
	"Allow me, sir," said Prince Andrew in Russian in a cold,isagreeable tone to Prince Hippolyte who was blocking his path.
	"I am expecting you, Pierre," said the same voice, but gently andffectionately.
	The postilion started, the carriage wheels rattled. Prince Hippolyteaughed spasmodically as he stood in the porch waiting for the vicomtehom he had promised to take home.
	"Well, mon cher," said the vicomte, having seated himself besideippolyte in the carriage, "your little princess is very nice, veryice indeed, quite French," and he kissed the tips of his fingers.ippolyte burst out laughing.
	"Do you know, you are a terrible chap for all your innocent airs,"ontinued the vicomte. "I pity the poor husband, that little officerho gives himself the airs of a monarch."
	Hippolyte spluttered again, and amid his laughter said, "And youere saying that the Russian ladies are not equal to the French? Oneas to know how to deal with them."
	Pierre reaching the house first went into Prince Andrew's study likene quite at home, and from habit immediately lay down on the sofa,ook from the shelf the first book that came to his hand (it wasaesar's Commentaries), and resting on his elbow, began reading itn the middle.
	"What have you done to Mlle Scherer? She will be quite ill now,"aid Prince Andrew, as he entered the study, rubbing his small whiteands.
	Pierre turned his whole body, making the sofa creak. He lifted hisager face to Prince Andrew, smiled, and waved his hand.
	"That abbe is very interesting but he does not see the thing inhe right light.... In my opinion perpetual peace is possible but- Io not know how to express it... not by a balance of politicalower...."
	It was evident that Prince Andrew was not interested in suchbstract conversation.
	"One can't everywhere say all one thinks, mon cher. Well, have yout last decided on anything? Are you going to be a guardsman or aiplomatist?" asked Prince Andrew after a momentary silence.
	Pierre sat up on the sofa, with his legs tucked under him.
	"Really, I don't yet know. I don't like either the one or thether."
	"But you must decide on something! Your father expects it."
	Pierre at the age of ten had been sent abroad with an abbe as tutor,nd had remained away till he was twenty. When he returned to Moscowis father dismissed the abbe and said to the young man, "Now go toetersburg, look round, and choose your profession. I will agree tonything. Here is a letter to Prince Vasili, and here is money.rite to me all about it, and I will help you in everything." Pierread already been choosing a career for three months, and had notecided on anything. It was about this choice that Prince Andrew waspeaking. Pierre rubbed his forehead.
	"But he must be a Freemason," said he, referring to the abbe whom head met that evening.
	"That is all nonsense." Prince Andrew again interrupted him, "let usalk business. Have you been to the Horse Guards?"
	"No, I have not; but this is what I have been thinking and wanted toell you. There is a war now against Napoleon. If it were a war forreedom I could understand it and should be the first to enter thermy; but to help England and Austria against the greatest man inhe world is not right."
	Prince Andrew only shrugged his shoulders at Pierre's childishords. He put on the air of one who finds it impossible to reply touch nonsense, but it would in fact have been difficult to give anyther answer than the one Prince Andrew gave to this naive question.
	"If no one fought except on his own conviction, there would be noars," he said.
	"And that would be splendid," said Pierre.
	Prince Andrew smiled ironically.
	"Very likely it would be splendid, but it will never come about..."
	"Well, why are you going to the war?" asked Pierre.
	"What for? I don't know. I must. Besides that I am going..." Heaused. "I am going because the life I am leading here does not suite!"BK1|CH7
	CHAPTER VII
	The rustle of a woman's dress was heard in the next room. Princendrew shook himself as if waking up, and his face assumed the look itad had in Anna Pavlovna's drawing room. Pierre removed his feetrom the sofa. The princess came in. She had changed her gown for aouse dress as fresh and elegant as the other. Prince Andrew rosend politely placed a chair for her.
	"How is it," she began, as usual in French, settling down brisklynd fussily in the easy chair, "how is it Annette never got married?ow stupid you men all are not to have married her! Excuse me foraying so, but you have no sense about women. What an argumentativeellow you are, Monsieur Pierre!"
	"And I am still arguing with your husband. I can't understand why heants to go to the war," replied Pierre, addressing the princessith none of the embarrassment so commonly shown by young men in theirntercourse with young women.
	The princess started. Evidently Pierre's words touched her to theuick.
	"Ah, that is just what I tell him!" said she. "I don't understandt; I don't in the least understand why men can't live without wars.ow is it that we women don't want anything of the kind, don't needt? Now you shall judge between us. I always tell him: Here he isncle's aide-de-camp, a most brilliant position. He is so wellnown, so much appreciated by everyone. The other day at thepraksins' I heard a lady asking, 'Is that the famous Princendrew?' I did indeed." She laughed. "He is so well receivedverywhere. He might easily become aide-de-camp to the Emperor. Younow the Emperor spoke to him most graciously. Annette and I werepeaking of how to arrange it. What do you think?"
	Pierre looked at his friend and, noticing that he did not like theonversation, gave no reply.
	"When are you starting?" he asked.
	"Oh, don't speak of his going, don't! I won't hear it spoken of,"aid the princess in the same petulantly playful tone in which she hadpoken to Hippolyte in the drawing room and which was so plainlyll-suited to the family circle of which Pierre was almost a member.Today when I remembered that all these delightful associations muste broken off... and then you know, Andre..." (she lookedignificantly at her husband) "I'm afraid, I'm afraid!" she whispered,nd a shudder ran down her back.
	Her husband looked at her as if surprised to notice that someoneesides Pierre and himself was in the room, and addressed her in aone of frigid politeness.
	"What is it you are afraid of, Lise? I don't understand," said he.
	"There, what egotists men all are: all, all egotists! Just for ahim of his own, goodness only knows why, he leaves me and locks me uplone in the country."
	"With my father and sister, remember," said Prince Andrew gently.
	"Alone all the same, without my friends.... And he expects me not toe afraid."
	Her tone was now querulous and her lip drawn up, giving her not aoyful, but an animal, squirrel-like expression. She paused as ifhe felt it indecorous to speak of her pregnancy before Pierre, thoughhe gist of the matter lay in that.
	"I still can't understand what you are afraid of," said Princendrew slowly, not taking his eyes off his wife.
	The princess blushed, and raised her arms with a gesture of despair.
	"No, Andrew, I must say you have changed. Oh, how you have..."
	"Your doctor tells you to go to bed earlier," said Prince Andrew.You had better go."
	The princess said nothing, but suddenly her short downy lipuivered. Prince Andrew rose, shrugged his shoulders, and walked abouthe room.
	Pierre looked over his spectacles with naive surprise, now at himnd now at her, moved as if about to rise too, but changed his mind.
	"Why should I mind Monsieur Pierre being here?" exclaimed the littlerincess suddenly, her pretty face all at once distorted by aearful grimace. "I have long wanted to ask you, Andrew, why youave changed so to me? What have I done to you? You are going to thear and have no pity for me. Why is it?"
	"Lise!" was all Prince Andrew said. But that one word expressed anntreaty, a threat, and above all conviction that she would herselfegret her words. But she went on hurriedly:
	"You treat me like an invalid or a child. I see it all! Did youehave like that six months ago?"
	"Lise, I beg you to desist," said Prince Andrew still moremphatically.
	Pierre, who had been growing more and more agitated as he listenedo all this, rose and approached the princess. He seemed unable toear the sight of tears and was ready to cry himself.
	"Calm yourself, Princess! It seems so to you because... I assure you myself have experienced... and so... because... No, excuse me! Anutsider is out of place here... No, don't distress yourself...ood-by!"
	Prince Andrew caught him by the hand.
	"No, wait, Pierre! The princess is too kind to wish to deprive me ofhe pleasure of spending the evening with you."
	"No, he thinks only of himself," muttered the princess withoutestraining her angry tears.
	"Lise!" said Prince Andrew dryly, raising his voice to the pitchhich indicates that patience is exhausted.
	Suddenly the angry, squirrel-like expression of the princess' prettyace changed into a winning and piteous look of fear. Her beautifulyes glanced askance at her husband's face, and her own assumed theimid, deprecating expression of a dog when it rapidly but feebly wagsts drooping tail.
	"Mon Dieu, mon Dieu!" she muttered, and lifting her dress with oneand she went up to her husband and kissed him on the forehead.
	"Good night, Lise," said he, rising and courteously kissing her hands he would have done to a stranger.BK1|CH8
	CHAPTER VIII
	The friends were silent. Neither cared to begin talking. Pierreontinually glanced at Prince Andrew; Prince Andrew rubbed hisorehead with his small hand.
	"Let us go and have supper," he said with a sigh, going to the door.
	They entered the elegant, newly decorated, and luxurious diningoom. Everything from the table napkins to the silver, china, andlass bore that imprint of newness found in the households of theewly married. Halfway through supper Prince Andrew leaned hislbows on the table and, with a look of nervous agitation such asierre had never before seen on his face, began to talk- as one whoas long had something on his mind and suddenly determines to speakut.
	"Never, never marry, my dear fellow! That's my advice: never marryill you can say to yourself that you have done all you are capablef, and until you have ceased to love the woman of your choice andave seen her plainly as she is, or else you will make a cruel andrrevocable mistake. Marry when you are old and good for nothing- orll that is good and noble in you will be lost. It will all beasted on trifles. Yes! Yes! Yes! Don't look at me with such surprise.f you marry expecting anything from yourself in the future, youill feel at every step that for you all is ended, all is closedxcept the drawing room, where you will be ranged side by side with court lackey and an idiot!... But what's the good?..." and heaved his arm.
	Pierre took off his spectacles, which made his face seem differentnd the good-natured expression still more apparent, and gazed atis friend in amazement.
	"My wife," continued Prince Andrew, "is an excellent woman, one ofhose rare women with whom a man's honor is safe; but, O God, whatould I not give now to be unmarried! You are the first and only oneo whom I mention this, because I like you."
	As he said this Prince Andrew was less than ever like that Bolkonskiho had lolled in Anna Pavlovna's easy chairs and with half-closedyes had uttered French phrases between his teeth. Every muscle of hishin face was now quivering with nervous excitement; his eyes, inhich the fire of life had seemed extinguished, now flashed withrilliant light. It was evident that the more lifeless he seemed atrdinary times, the more impassioned he became in these moments oflmost morbid irritation.
	"You don't understand why I say this," he continued, "but it ishe whole story of life. You talk of Bonaparte and his career," saide (though Pierre had not mentioned Bonaparte), "but Bonaparte when heorked went step by step toward his goal. He was free, he hadothing but his aim to consider, and he reached it. But tie yourselfp with a woman and, like a chained convict, you lose all freedom! Andll you have of hope and strength merely weighs you down andorments you with regret. Drawing rooms, gossip, balls, vanity, andriviality- these are the enchanted circle I cannot escape from. Im now going to the war, the greatest war there ever was, and I knowothing and am fit for nothing. I am very amiable and have a causticit," continued Prince Andrew, "and at Anna Pavlovna's they listeno me. And that stupid set without whom my wife cannot exist, andhose women... If you only knew what those society women are, andomen in general! My father is right. Selfish, vain, stupid, trivialn everything- that's what women are when you see them in their trueolors! When you meet them in society it seems as if there wereomething in them, but there's nothing, nothing, nothing! No, don'tarry, my dear fellow; don't marry!" concluded Prince Andrew.
	"It seems funny to me," said Pierre, "that you, you shouldonsider yourself incapable and your life a spoiled life. You haveverything before you, everything. And you..."
	He did not finish his sentence, but his tone showed how highly hehought of his friend and how much he expected of him in the future.
	"How can he talk like that?" thought Pierre. He considered hisriend a model of perfection because Prince Andrew possessed in theighest degree just the very qualities Pierre lacked, and whichight be best described as strength of will. Pierre was alwaysstonished at Prince Andrew's calm manner of treating everybody, hisxtraordinary memory, his extensive reading (he had read everything,new everything, and had an opinion about everything), but above allt his capacity for work and study. And if Pierre was often strucky Andrew's lack of capacity for philosophical meditation (to which heimself was particularly addicted), he regarded even this not as aefect but as a sign of strength.
	Even in the best, most friendly and simplest relations of life,raise and commendation are essential, just as grease is necessaryo wheels that they may run smoothly.
	"My part is played out," said Prince Andrew. "What's the use ofalking about me? Let us talk about you," he added after a silence,miling at his reassuring thoughts.
	That smile was immediately reflected on Pierre's face.
	"But what is there to say about me?" said Pierre, his faceelaxing into a careless, merry smile. "What am I? An illegitimateon!" He suddenly blushed crimson, and it was plain that he had made areat effort to say this. "Without a name and without means... Andt really..." But he did not say what "it really" was. "For theresent I am free and am all right. Only I haven't the least idea what am to do; I wanted to consult you seriously."
	Prince Andrew looked kindly at him, yet his glance- friendly andffectionate as it was- expressed a sense of his own superiority.
	"I am fond of you, especially as you are the one live man amongur whole set. Yes, you're all right! Choose what you will; it's allhe same. You'll be all right anywhere. But look here: give upisiting those Kuragins and leading that sort of life. It suits you soadly- all this debauchery, dissipation, and the rest of it!"
	"What would you have, my dear fellow?" answered Pierre, shruggingis shoulders. "Women, my dear fellow; women!"
	"I don't understand it," replied Prince Andrew. "Women who are commel faut, that's a different matter; but the Kuragins' set of women,women and wine' I don't understand!"
	Pierre was staying at Prince Vasili Kuragin's and sharing theissipated life of his son Anatole, the son whom they were planning toeform by marrying him to Prince Andrew's sister.
	"Do you know?" said Pierre, as if suddenly struck by a happyhought, "seriously, I have long been thinking of it.... Leadinguch a life I can't decide or think properly about anything. One'sead aches, and one spends all one's money. He asked me for tonight,ut I won't go."
	"You give me your word of honor not to go?"
	"On my honor!"BK1|CH9
	CHAPTER IX
	It was past one o'clock when Pierre left his friend. It was aloudless, northern, summer night. Pierre took an open cab intendingo drive straight home. But the nearer he drew to the house the moree felt the impossibility of going to sleep on such a night. It wasight enough to see a long way in the deserted street and it seemedore like morning or evening than night. On the way Pierreemembered that Anatole Kuragin was expecting the usual set forards that evening, after which there was generally a drinking bout,inishing with visits of a kind Pierre was very fond of.
	"I should like to go to Kuragin's," thought he.
	But he immediately recalled his promise to Prince Andrew not to gohere. Then, as happens to people of weak character, he desired soassionately once more to enjoy that dissipation he was soccustomed to that he decided to go. The thought immediatelyccurred to him that his promise to Prince Andrew was of no account,ecause before he gave it he had already promised Prince Anatole toome to his gathering; "besides," thought he, "all such 'words ofonor' are conventional things with no definite meaning, especially ifne considers that by tomorrow one may be dead, or something soxtraordinary may happen to one that honor and dishonor will be allhe same!" Pierre often indulged in reflections of this sort,ullifying all his decisions and intentions. He went to Kuragin's.
	Reaching the large house near the Horse Guards' barracks, in whichnatole lived, Pierre entered the lighted porch, ascended thetairs, and went in at the open door. There was no one in thenteroom; empty bottles, cloaks, and overshoes were lying about; thereas a smell of alcohol, and sounds of voices and shouting in theistance.
	Cards and supper were over, but the visitors had not yetispersed. Pierre threw off his cloak and entered the first room, inhich were the remains of supper. A footman, thinking no one sawim, was drinking on the sly what was left in the glasses. From thehird room came sounds of laughter, the shouting of familiar voices,he growling of a bear, and general commotion. Some eight or nineoung men were crowding anxiously round an open window. Three othersere romping with a young bear, one pulling him by the chain andrying to set him at the others.
	"I bet a hundred on Stevens!" shouted one.
	"Mind, no holding on!" cried another.
	"I bet on Dolokhov!" cried a third. "Kuragin, you part our hands."
	"There, leave Bruin alone; here's a bet on."
	"At one draught, or he loses!" shouted a fourth.
	"Jacob, bring a bottle!" shouted the host, a tall, handsome fellowho stood in the midst of the group, without a coat, and with his fineinen shirt unfastened in front. "Wait a bit, you fellows.... Heres Petya! Good man!" cried he, addressing Pierre.
	Another voice, from a man of medium height with clear blue eyes,articularly striking among all these drunken voices by its sobering, cried from the window: "Come here; part the bets!" This wasolokhov, an officer of the Semenov regiment, a notorious gamblernd duelist, who was living with Anatole. Pierre smiled, looking aboutim merrily.
	"I don't understand. What's it all about?"
	"Wait a bit, he is not drunk yet! A bottle here," said Anatole,aking a glass from the table he went up to Pierre.
	"First of all you must drink!"
	Pierre drank one glass after another, looking from under his browst the tipsy guests who were again crowding round the window, andistening to their chatter. Anatole kept on refilling Pierre's glasshile explaining that Dolokhov was betting with Stevens, an Englishaval officer, that he would drink a bottle of rum sitting on theuter ledge of the third floor window with his legs hanging out.
	"Go on, you must drink it all," said Anatole, giving Pierre the lastlass, "or I won't let you go!"
	"No, I won't," said Pierre, pushing Anatole aside, and he went up tohe window.
	Dolokhov was holding the Englishman's hand and clearly andistinctly repeating the terms of the bet, addressing himselfarticularly to Anatole and Pierre.
	Dolokhov was of medium height, with curly hair and light-blueyes. He was about twenty-five. Like all infantry officers he woreo mustache, so that his mouth, the most striking feature of his face,as clearly seen. The lines of that mouth were remarkably finelyurved. The middle of the upper lip formed a sharp wedge and closedirmly on the firm lower one, and something like two distinct smileslayed continually round the two corners of the mouth; this,ogether with the resolute, insolent intelligence of his eyes,roduced an effect which made it impossible not to notice his face.olokhov was a man of small means and no connections. Yet, thoughnatole spent tens of thousands of rubles, Dolokhov lived with him andad placed himself on such a footing that all who knew them, includingnatole himself, respected him more than they did Anatole. Dolokhovould play all games and nearly always won. However much he drank,e never lost his clearheadedness. Both Kuragin and Dolokhov were athat time notorious among the rakes and scapegraces of Petersburg.
	The bottle of rum was brought. The window frame which preventednyone from sitting on the outer sill was being forced out by twoootmen, who were evidently flurried and intimidated by the directionsnd shouts of the gentlemen around.
	Anatole with his swaggering air strode up to the window. He wantedo smash something. Pushing away the footmen he tugged at the frame,ut could not move it. He smashed a pane.
	"You have a try, Hercules," said he, turning to Pierre.
	Pierre seized the crossbeam, tugged, and wrenched the oak frameut with a crash.
	"Take it right out, or they'll think I'm holding on," said Dolokhov.
	"Is the Englishman bragging?... Eh? Is it all right?" said Anatole.
	"First-rate," said Pierre, looking at Dolokhov, who with a bottle ofum in his hand was approaching the window, from which the light ofhe sky, the dawn merging with the afterglow of sunset, was visible.
	Dolokhov, the bottle of rum still in his hand, jumped onto theindow sill. "Listen!" cried he, standing there and addressing thosen the room. All were silent.
	"I bet fifty imperials"- he spoke French that the Englishman mightnderstand him, but he did, not speak it very well- "I bet fiftymperials... or do you wish to make it a hundred?" added he,ddressing the Englishman.
	"No, fifty," replied the latter.
	"All right. Fifty imperials... that I will drink a whole bottle ofum without taking it from my mouth, sitting outside the window onhis spot" (he stooped and pointed to the sloping ledge outside theindow) "and without holding on to anything. Is that right?"
	"Quite right," said the Englishman.
	Anatole turned to the Englishman and taking him by one of theuttons of his coat and looking down at him- the Englishman was short-egan repeating the terms of the wager to him in English.
	"Wait!" cried Dolokhov, hammering with the bottle on the window sillo attract attention. "Wait a bit, Kuragin. Listen! If anyone elseoes the same, I will pay him a hundred imperials. Do you understand?"
	The Englishman nodded, but gave no indication whether he intended toccept this challenge or not. Anatole did not release him, andhough he kept nodding to show that he understood, Anatole went onranslating Dolokhov's words into English. A thin young lad, an hussarf the Life Guards, who had been losing that evening, climbed on theindow sill, leaned over, and looked down.
	"Oh! Oh! Oh!" he muttered, looking down from the window at thetones of the pavement.
	"Shut up!" cried Dolokhov, pushing him away from the window. The ladumped awkwardly back into the room, tripping over his spurs.
	Placing the bottle on the window sill where he could reach itasily, Dolokhov climbed carefully and slowly through the window andowered his legs. Pressing against both sides of the window, hedjusted himself on his seat, lowered his hands, moved a little to theight and then to the left, and took up the bottle. Anatole broughtwo candles and placed them on the window sill, though it waslready quite light. Dolokhov's back in his white shirt, and his curlyead, were lit up from both sides. Everyone crowded to the window, thenglishman in front. Pierre stood smiling but silent. One man, olderhan the others present, suddenly pushed forward with a scared andngry look and wanted to seize hold of Dolokhov's shirt.
	"I say, this is folly! He'll be killed," said this more sensiblean.
	Anatole stopped him.
	"Don't touch him! You'll startle him and then he'll be killed.h?... What then?... Eh?"
	Dolokhov turned round and, again holding on with both hands,rranged himself on his seat.
	"If anyone comes meddling again," said he, emitting the wordseparately through his thin compressed lips, "I will throw him downhere. Now then!"
	Saying this he again turned round, dropped his hands, took theottle and lifted it to his lips, threw back his head, and raisedis free hand to balance himself. One of the footmen who had stoopedo pick up some broken glass remained in that position withoutaking his eyes from the window and from Dolokhov's back. Anatoletood erect with staring eyes. The Englishman looked on sideways,ursing up his lips. The man who had wished to stop the affair rano a corner of the room and threw himself on a sofa with his face tohe wall. Pierre hid his face, from which a faint smile forgot to fadehough his features now expressed horror and fear. All were still.ierre took his hands from his eyes. Dolokhov still sat in the sameosition, only his head was thrown further back till his curly hairouched his shirt collar, and the hand holding the bottle was liftedigher and higher and trembled with the effort. The bottle wasmptying perceptibly and rising still higher and his head tiltinget further back. "Why is it so long?" thought Pierre. It seemed toim that more than half an hour had elapsed. Suddenly Dolokhov made backward movement with his spine, and his arm trembled nervously;his was sufficient to cause his whole body to slip as he sat on theloping ledge. As he began slipping down, his head and arm waveredtill more with the strain. One hand moved as if to clutch theindow sill, but refrained from touching it. Pierre again coveredis eyes and thought he would never never them again. Suddenly heas aware of a stir all around. He looked up: Dolokhov was standing onhe window sill, with a pale but radiant face.
	"It's empty."
	He threw the bottle to the Englishman, who caught it neatly.olokhov jumped down. He smelt strongly of rum.
	"Well done!... Fine fellow!... There's a bet for you!... Devilake you!" came from different sides.
	The Englishman took out his purse and began counting out theoney. Dolokhov stood frowning and did not speak. Pierre jumped uponhe window sill.
	"Gentlemen, who wishes to bet with me? I'll do the same thing!" heuddenly cried. "Even without a bet, there! Tell them to bring me aottle. I'll do it.... Bring a bottle!"
	"Let him do it, let him do it," said Dolokhov, smiling.
	"What next? Have you gone mad?... No one would let you!... Why,ou go giddy even on a staircase," exclaimed several voices.
	"I'll drink it! Let's have a bottle of rum!" shouted Pierre, banginghe table with a determined and drunken gesture and preparing to climbut of the window.
	They seized him by his arms; but he was so strong that everyoneho touched him was sent flying.
	"No, you'll never manage him that way," said Anatole. "Wait a bitnd I'll get round him.... Listen! I'll take your bet tomorrow, butow we are all going to -'s."
	"Come on then," cried Pierre. "Come on!... And we'll take Bruin withs."
	And he caught the bear, took it in his arms, lifted it from theround, and began dancing round the room with it.BK1|CH10
	CHAPTER X
	Prince Vasili kept the promise he had given to Princessrubetskaya who had spoken to him on behalf of her only son Boris onhe evening of Anna Pavlovna's soiree. The matter was mentioned to themperor, an exception made, and Boris transferred into the regiment ofemenov Guards with the rank of cornet. He received, however, noppointment to Kutuzov's staff despite all Anna Mikhaylovna'sndeavors and entreaties. Soon after Anna Pavlovna's reception Annaikhaylovna returned to Moscow and went straight to her richelations, the Rostovs, with whom she stayed when in the town andhere and where her darling Bory, who had only just entered a regimentf the line and was being at once transferred to the Guards as aornet, had been educated from childhood and lived for years at aime. The Guards had already left Petersburg on the tenth of August,nd her son, who had remained in Moscow for his equipment, was to joinhem on the march to Radzivilov.
	It was St. Natalia's day and the name day of two of the Rostovs- theother and the youngest daughter- both named Nataly. Ever since theorning, carriages with six horses had been coming and goingontinually, bringing visitors to the Countess Rostova's big housen the Povarskaya, so well known to all Moscow. The countess herselfnd her handsome eldest daughter were in the drawing-room with theisitors who came to congratulate, and who constantly succeeded onenother in relays.
	The countess was a woman of about forty-five, with a thin Orientalype of face, evidently worn out with childbearing- she had hadwelve. A languor of motion and speech, resulting from weakness,ave her a distinguished air which inspired respect. Princess Annaikhaylovna Drubetskaya, who as a member of the household was alsoeated in the drawing room, helped to receive and entertain theisitors. The young people were in one of the inner rooms, notonsidering it necessary to take part in receiving the visitors. Theount met the guests and saw them off, inviting them all to dinner.
	"I am very, very grateful to you, mon cher," or "ma chere"- healled everyone without exception and without the slightestariation in his tone, "my dear," whether they were above or below himn rank- "I thank you for myself and for our two dear ones whoseame day we are keeping. But mind you come to dinner or I shall beffended, ma chere! On behalf of the whole family I beg you to come,on cher!" These words he repeated to everyone without exception orariation, and with the same expression on his full, cheerful,lean-shaven face, the same firm pressure of the hand and the sameuick, repeated bows. As soon as he had seen a visitor off he returnedo one of those who were still in the drawing room, drew a chairoward him or her, and jauntily spreading out his legs and putting hisands on his knees with the air of a man who enjoys life and knows howo live, he swayed to and fro with dignity, offered surmises about theeather, or touched on questions of health, sometimes in Russian andometimes in very bad but self-confident French; then again, like aan weary but unflinching in the fulfillment of duty, he rose to seeome visitors off and, stroking his scanty gray hairs over his baldatch, also asked them to dinner. Sometimes on his way back from thenteroom he would pass through the conservatory and pantry into thearge marble dining hall, where tables were being set out for eightyeople; and looking at the footmen, who were bringing in silver andhina, moving tables, and unfolding damask table linen, he wouldall Dmitri Vasilevich, a man of good family and the manager of allis affairs, and while looking with pleasure at the enormous tableould say: "Well, Dmitri, you'll see that things are all as theyhould be? That's right! The great thing is the serving, that's it."nd with a complacent sigh he would return to the drawing room.
	"Marya Lvovna Karagina and her daughter!" announced the countess'igantic footman in his bass voice, entering the drawing room. Theountess reflected a moment and took a pinch from a gold snuffbox wither husband's portrait on it.
	"I'm quite worn out by these callers. However, I'll see her and noore. She is so affected. Ask her in," she said to the footman in aad voice, as if saying: "Very well, finish me off."
	A tall, stout, and proud-looking woman, with a round-faced smilingaughter, entered the drawing room, their dresses rustling.
	"Dear Countess, what an age... She has been laid up, poor child...t the Razumovski's ball... and Countess Apraksina... I was soelighted..." came the sounds of animated feminine voices,nterrupting one another and mingling with the rustling of dresses andhe scraping of chairs. Then one of those conversations began whichast out until, at the first pause, the guests rise with a rustle ofresses and say, "I am so delighted... Mamma's health... andountess Apraksina... and then, again rustling, pass into thenteroom, put on cloaks or mantles, and drive away. The conversationas on the chief topic of the day: the illness of the wealthy andelebrated beau of Catherine's day, Count Bezukhov, and about hisllegitimate son Pierre, the one who had behaved so improperly at Annaavlovna's reception.
	"I am so sorry for the poor count," said the visitor. "He is in suchad health, and now this vexation about his son is enough to killim!"
	"What is that?" asked the countess as if she did not know what theisitor alluded to, though she had already heard about the cause ofount Bezukhov's distress some fifteen times.
	"That's what comes of a modern education," exclaimed the visitor.It seems that while he was abroad this young man was allowed to do ase liked, now in Petersburg I hear he has been doing such terriblehings that he has been expelled by the police."
	"You don't say so!" replied the countess.
	"He chose his friends badly," interposed Anna Mikhaylovna. "Princeasili's son, he, and a certain Dolokhov have, it is said, been upo heaven only knows what! And they have had to suffer for it.olokhov has been degraded to the ranks and Bezukhov's son sent backo Moscow. Anatole Kuragin's father managed somehow to get his son'sffair hushed up, but even he was ordered out of Petersburg."
	"But what have they been up to?" asked the countess.
	"They are regular brigands, especially Dolokhov," replied theisitor. "He is a son of Marya Ivanovna Dolokhova, such a worthyoman, but there, just fancy! Those three got hold of a bearomewhere, put it in a carriage, and set off with it to visit somectresses! The police tried to interfere, and what did the young meno? They tied a policeman and the bear back to back and put the bearnto the Moyka Canal. And there was the bear swimming about with theoliceman on his back!"
	"What a nice figure the policeman must have cut, my dear!" shoutedhe count, dying with laughter.
	"Oh, how dreadful! How can you laugh at it, Count?"
	Yet the ladies themselves could not help laughing.
	"It was all they could do to rescue the poor man," continued theisitor. "And to think it is Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov's son whomuses himself in this sensible manner! And he was said to be soell educated and clever. This is all that his foreign education hasone for him! I hope that here in Moscow no one will receive him, inpite of his money. They wanted to introduce him to me, but I quiteeclined: I have my daughters to consider."
	"Why do you say this young man is so rich?" asked the countess,urning away from the girls, who at once assumed an air ofnattention. "His children are all illegitimate. I think Pierre alsos illegitimate."
	The visitor made a gesture with her hand.
	"I should think he has a score of them."
	Princess Anna Mikhaylovna intervened in the conversation,vidently wishing to show her connections and knowledge of what wentn in society.
	"The fact of the matter is," said she significantly, and also in aalf whisper, "everyone knows Count Cyril's reputation.... He has lostount of his children, but this Pierre was his favorite."
	"How handsome the old man still was only a year ago!" remarked theountess. "I have never seen a handsomer man."
	"He is very much altered now," said Anna Mikhaylovna. "Well, as Ias saying, Prince Vasili is the next heir through his wife, but theount is very fond of Pierre, looked after his education, and wrote tohe Emperor about him; so that in the case of his death- and he iso ill that he may die at any moment, and Dr. Lorrain has come frometersburg- no one knows who will inherit his immense fortune,ierre or Prince Vasili. Forty thousand serfs and millions ofubles! I know it all very well for Prince Vasili told me himself.esides, Cyril Vladimirovich is my mother's second cousin. He's alsoy Bory's godfather," she added, as if she attached no importance atll to the fact.
	"Prince Vasili arrived in Moscow yesterday. I hear he has come onome inspection business," remarked the visitor.
	"Yes, but between ourselves," said the princess, that is aretext. The fact is he has come to see Count Cyril Vladimirovich,earing how ill he is."
	"But do you know, my dear, that was a capital joke," said the count;nd seeing that the elder visitor was not listening, he turned tohe young ladies. "I can just imagine what a funny figure thatoliceman cut!"
	And as he waved his arms to impersonate the policeman, his portlyorm again shook with a deep ringing laugh, the laugh of one wholways eats well and, in particular, drinks well. "So do come and dineith us!" he said.BK1|CH11
	CHAPTER XI
	Silence ensued. The countess looked at her callers, smiling affably,ut not concealing the fact that she would not be distressed if theyow rose and took their leave. The visitor's daughter was alreadymoothing down her dress with an inquiring look at her mother, whenuddenly from the next room were heard the footsteps of boys and girlsunning to the door and the noise of a chair falling over, and airl of thirteen, hiding something in the folds of her short muslinrock, darted in and stopped short in the middle of the room. It wasvident that she had not intended her flight to bring her so far.ehind her in the doorway appeared a student with a crimson coatollar, an officer of the Guards, a girl of fifteen, and a plumposy-faced boy in a short jacket.
	The count jumped up and, swaying from side to side, spread hisrms wide and threw them round the little girl who had run in.
	"Ah, here she is!" he exclaimed laughing. "My pet, whose name day its. My dear pet!"
	"Ma chere, there is a time for everything," said the countess witheigned severity. "You spoil her, Ilya," she added, turning to herusband.
	"How do you do, my dear? I wish you many happy returns of yourame day," said the visitor. "What a charming child," she added,ddressing the mother.
	This black-eyed, wide-mouthed girl, not pretty but full of life-ith childish bare shoulders which after her run heaved and shooker bodice, with black curls tossed backward, thin bare arms, littleegs in lace-frilled drawers, and feet in low slippers- was just athat charming age when a girl is no longer a child, though the childs not yet a young woman. Escaping from her father she ran to hide herlushed face in the lace of her mother's mantilla- not paying theeast attention to her severe remark- and began to laugh. She laughed,nd in fragmentary sentences tried to explain about a doll which sheroduced from the folds of her frock.
	"Do you see?... My doll... Mimi... You see..." was all Natashaanaged to utter (to her everything seemed funny). She leanedgainst her mother and burst into such a loud, ringing fit of laughterhat even the prim visitor could not help joining in.
	"Now then, go away and take your monstrosity with you," said theother, pushing away her daughter with pretended sternness, andurning to the visitor she added: "She is my youngest girl."
	Natasha, raising her face for a moment from her mother's mantilla,lanced up at her through tears of laughter, and again hid her face.
	The visitor, compelled to look on at this family scene, thought itecessary to take some part in it.
	"Tell me, my dear," said she to Natasha, "is Mimi a relation ofours? A daughter, I suppose?"
	Natasha did not like the visitor's tone of condescension to childishhings. She did not reply, but looked at her seriously.
	Meanwhile the younger generation: Boris, the officer, Annaikhaylovna's son; Nicholas, the undergraduate, the count's eldeston; Sonya, the count's fifteen-year-old niece, and little Petya,is youngest boy, had all settled down in the drawing room and werebviously trying to restrain within the bounds of decorum thexcitement and mirth that shone in all their faces. Evidently in theack rooms, from which they had dashed out so impetuously, theonversation had been more amusing than the drawing-room talk ofociety scandals, the weather, and Countess Apraksina. Now and thenhey glanced at one another, hardly able to suppress their laughter.
	The two young men, the student and the officer, friends fromhildhood, were of the same age and both handsome fellows, thoughot alike. Boris was tall and fair, and his calm and handsome face hadegular, delicate features. Nicholas was short with curly hair andn open expression. Dark hairs were already showing on his upperip, and his whole face expressed impetuosity and enthusiasm. Nicholaslushed when he entered the drawing room. He evidently tried to findomething to say, but failed. Boris on the contrary at once foundis footing, and related quietly and humorously how he had know thatoll Mimi when she was still quite a young lady, before her nose wasroken; how she had aged during the five years he had known her, andow her head had cracked right across the skull. Having said this helanced at Natasha. She turned away from him and glanced at herounger brother, who was screwing up his eyes and shaking withuppressed laughter, and unable to control herself any longer, sheumped up and rushed from the room as fast as her nimble little feetould carry her. Boris did not laugh.
	"You were meaning to go out, weren't you, Mamma? Do you want thearriage?" he asked his mother with a smile.
	"Yes, yes, go and tell them to get it ready," she answered,eturning his smile.
	Boris quietly left the room and went in search of Natasha. The plumpoy ran after them angrily, as if vexed that their program had beenisturbed.BK1|CH12
	CHAPTER XII
	The only young people remaining in the drawing room, not countinghe young lady visitor and the countess' eldest daughter (who was fourears older than her sister and behaved already like a grown-uperson), were Nicholas and Sonya, the niece. Sonya was a slenderittle brunette with a tender look in her eyes which were veiled byong lashes, thick black plaits coiling twice round her head, and aawny tint in her complexion and especially in the color of herlender but graceful and muscular arms and neck. By the grace of herovements, by the softness and flexibility of her small limbs, andy a certain coyness and reserve of manner, she reminded one of aretty, half-grown kitten which promises to become a beautifulittle cat. She evidently considered it proper to show an interestn the general conversation by smiling, but in spite of herself heryes under their thick long lashes watched her cousin who was going tooin the army, with such passionate girlish adoration that her smileould not for a single instant impose upon anyone, and it was clearhat the kitten had settled down only to spring up with more energynd again play with her cousin as soon as they too could, like Natashand Boris, escape from the drawing room.
	"Ah yes, my dear," said the count, addressing the visitor andointing to Nicholas, "his friend Boris has become an officer, ando for friendship's sake he is leaving the university and me, hisld father, and entering the military service, my dear. And thereas a place and everything waiting for him in the Archives Department!sn't that friendship?" remarked the count in an inquiring tone.
	"But they say that war has been declared," replied the visitor.
	"They've been saying so a long while," said the count, "andhey'll say so again and again, and that will be the end of it. Myear, there's friendship for you," he repeated. "He's joining theussars."
	The visitor, not knowing what to say, shook her head.
	"It's not at all from friendship," declared Nicholas, flaring up andurning away as if from a shameful aspersion. "It is not fromriendship at all; I simply feel that the army is my vocation."
	He glanced at his cousin and the young lady visitor; and they wereoth regarding him with a smile of approbation.
	"Schubert, the colonel of the Pavlograd Hussars, is dining with usoday. He has been here on leave and is taking Nicholas back with him.t can't be helped!" said the count, shrugging his shoulders andpeaking playfully of a matter that evidently distressed him.
	"I have already told you, Papa," said his son, "that if you don'tish to let me go, I'll stay. But I know I am no use anywhere exceptn the army; I am not a diplomat or a government clerk.- I don'tnow how to hide what I feel." As he spoke he kept glancing with thelirtatiousness of a handsome youth at Sonya and the young ladyisitor.
	The little kitten, feasting her eyes on him, seemed ready at anyoment to start her gambols again and display her kittenish nature.
	"All right, all right!" said the old count. "He always flares up!his Buonaparte has turned all their heads; they all think of how heose from an ensign and became Emperor. Well, well, God grant it,"e added, not noticing his visitor's sarcastic smile.
	The elders began talking about Bonaparte. Julie Karagina turned tooung Rostov.
	"What a pity you weren't at the Arkharovs' on Thursday. It was soull without you," said she, giving him a tender smile.
	The young man, flattered, sat down nearer to her with a coquettishmile, and engaged the smiling Julie in a confidential conversationithout at all noticing that his involuntary smile had stabbed theeart of Sonya, who blushed and smiled unnaturally. In the midst ofis talk he glanced round at her. She gave him a passionately angrylance, and hardly able to restrain her tears and maintain thertificial smile on her lips, she got up and left the room. Allicholas' animation vanished. He waited for the first pause in theonversation, and then with a distressed face left the room to findonya.
	"How plainly all these young people wear their hearts on theirleeves!" said Anna Mikhaylovna, pointing to Nicholas as he wentut. "Cousinage- dangereux voisinage;"* she added.
	*Cousinhood is a dangerous neighborhood.
	"Yes," said the countess when the brightness these young peoplead brought into the room had vanished; and as if answering a questiono one had put but which was always in her mind, "and how muchuffering, how much anxiety one has had to go through that we mightejoice in them now! And yet really the anxiety is greater now thanhe joy. One is always, always anxious! Especially just at this age,o dangerous both for girls and boys."
	"It all depends on the bringing up," remarked the visitor.
	"Yes, you're quite right," continued the countess. "Till now Iave always, thank God, been my children's friend and had their fullonfidence," said she, repeating the mistake of so many parents whomagine that their children have no secrets from them. "I know I shalllways be my daughters' first confidante, and that if Nicholas, withis impulsive nature, does get into mischief (a boy can't help it), heill all the same never be like those Petersburg young men."
	"Yes, they are splendid, splendid youngsters," chimed in theount, who always solved questions that seemed to him perplexing byeciding that everything was splendid. "Just fancy: wants to be anussar. What's one to do, my dear?"
	"What a charming creature your younger girl is," said the visitor;a little volcano!"
	"Yes, a regular volcano," said the count. "Takes after me! Andhat a voice she has; though she's my daughter, I tell the truthhen I say she'll be a singer, a second Salomoni! We have engaged antalian to give her lessons."
	"Isn't she too young? I have heard that it harms the voice torain it at that age."
	"Oh no, not at all too young!" replied the count. "Why, ourothers used to be married at twelve or thirteen."
	"And she's in love with Boris already. Just fancy!" said theountess with a gentle smile, looking at Boris' and went on, evidentlyoncerned with a thought that always occupied her: "Now you see if Iere to be severe with her and to forbid it... goodness knows whathey might be up to on the sly" (she meant that they would beissing), "but as it is, I know every word she utters. She will comeunning to me of her own accord in the evening and tell me everything.erhaps I spoil her, but really that seems the best plan. With herlder sister I was stricter."
	"Yes, I was brought up quite differently," remarked the handsomelder daughter, Countess Vera, with a smile.
	But the smile did not enhance Vera's beauty as smiles generallyo; on the contrary it gave her an unnatural, and thereforenpleasant, expression. Vera was good-looking, not at all stupid,uick at learning, was well brought up, and had a pleasant voice; whathe said was true and appropriate, yet, strange to say, everyone-he visitors and countess alike- turned to look at her as if wonderinghy she had said it, and they all felt awkward.
	"People are always too clever with their eldest children and tryo make something exceptional of them," said the visitor.
	"What's the good of denying it, my dear? Our dear countess was toolever with Vera," said the count. "Well, what of that? She's turnedut splendidly all the same," he added, winking at Vera.
	The guests got up and took their leave, promising to return toinner.
	"What manners! I thought they would never go," said the countess,hen she had seen her guests out.BK1|CH13
	CHAPTER XIII
	When Natasha ran out of the drawing room she only went as far as theonservatory. There she paused and stood listening to the conversationn the drawing room, waiting for Boris to come out. She was alreadyrowing impatient, and stamped her foot, ready to cry at his notoming at once, when she heard the young man's discreet stepspproaching neither quickly nor slowly. At this Natasha dashed swiftlymong the flower tubs and hid there.
	Boris paused in the middle of the room, looked round, brushed aittle dust from the sleeve of his uniform, and going up to a mirrorxamined his handsome face. Natasha, very still, peered out from hermbush, waiting to see what he would do. He stood a little whileefore the glass, smiled, and walked toward the other door. Natashaas about to call him but changed her mind. "Let him look for me,"hought she. Hardly had Boris gone than Sonya, flushed, in tears,nd muttering angrily, came in at the other door. Natasha checkeder first impulse to run out to her, and remained in her hiding place,atching- as under an invisible cap- to see what went on in the world.he was experiencing a new and peculiar pleasure. Sonya, mutteringo herself, kept looking round toward the drawing-room door. It openednd Nicholas came in.
	"Sonya, what is the matter with you? How can you?" said he,unning up to her.
	"It's nothing, nothing; leave me alone!" sobbed Sonya.
	"Ah, I know what it is."
	"Well, if you do, so much the better, and you can go back to her!"
	"So-o-onya! Look here! How can you torture me and yourself likehat, for a mere fancy?" said Nicholas taking her hand.
	Sonya did not pull it away, and left off crying. Natasha, nottirring and scarcely breathing, watched from her ambush withparkling eyes. "What will happen now?" thought she.
	"Sonya! What is anyone in the world to me? You alone areverything!" said Nicholas. "And I will prove it to you."
	"I don't like you to talk like that."
	"Well, then, I won't; only forgive me, Sonya!" He drew her to himnd kissed her.
	"Oh, how nice," thought Natasha; and when Sonya and Nicholas hadone out of the conservatory she followed and called Boris to her.
	"Boris, come here," said she with a sly and significant look. "Iave something to tell you. Here, here!" and she led him into theonservatory to the place among the tubs where she had been hiding.
	Boris followed her, smiling.
	"What is the something?" asked he.
	She grew confused, glanced round, and, seeing the doll she hadhrown down on one of the tubs, picked it up.
	"Kiss the doll," said she.
	Boris looked attentively and kindly at her eager face, but did noteply.
	"Don't you want to? Well, then, come here," said she, and wenturther in among the plants and threw down the doll. "Closer, closer!"he whispered.
	She caught the young officer by his cuffs, and a look of solemnitynd fear appeared on her flushed face.
	"And me? Would you like to kiss me?" she whispered almost inaudibly,lancing up at him from under her brows, smiling, and almost cryingrom excitement.
	Boris blushed.
	"How funny you are!" he said, bending down to her and blushing stillore, but he waited and did nothing.
	Suddenly she jumped up onto a tub to be higher than he, embraced himo that both her slender bare arms clasped him above his neck, and,ossing back her hair, kissed him full on the lips.
	Then she slipped down among the flowerpots on the other side ofhe tubs and stood, hanging her head.
	"Natasha," he said, "you know that I love you, but..."
	"You are in love with me?" Natasha broke in.
	"Yes, I am, but please don't let us do like that.... In another fourears... then I will ask for your hand."
	Natasha considered.
	"Thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen," she counted on her slenderittle fingers. "All right! Then it's settled?"
	A smile of joy and satisfaction lit up her eager face.
	"Settled!" replied Boris.
	"Forever?" said the little girl. "Till death itself?"
	She took his arm and with a happy face went with him into thedjoining sitting room.BK1|CH14
	CHAPTER XIV
	After receiving her visitors, the countess was so tired that sheave orders to admit no more, but the porter was told to be sure tonvite to dinner all who came "to congratulate." The countess wishedo have a tete-a-tete talk with the friend of her childhood,rincess Anna Mikhaylovna, whom she had not seen properly since sheeturned from Petersburg. Anna Mikhaylovna, with her tear-worn butleasant face, drew her chair nearer to that of the countess.
	"With you I will be quite frank," said Anna Mikhaylovna. "Therere not many left of us old friends! That's why I so value yourriendship."
	Anna Mikhaylovna looked at Vera and paused. The countess pressed herriend's hand.
	"Vera," she said to her eldest daughter who was evidently not aavorite, "how is it you have so little tact? Don't you see you areot wanted here? Go to the other girls, or..."
	The handsome Vera smiled contemptuously but did not seem at allurt.
	"If you had told me sooner, Mamma, I would have gone," she replieds she rose to go to her own room.
	But as she passed the sitting room she noticed two couplesitting, one pair at each window. She stopped and smiled scornfully.onya was sitting close to Nicholas who was copying out some versesor her, the first he had ever written. Boris and Natasha were athe other window and ceased talking when Vera entered. Sonya andatasha looked at Vera with guilty, happy faces.
	It was pleasant and touching to see these little girls in love;ut apparently the sight of them roused no pleasant feeling in Vera.
	"How often have I asked you not to take my things?" she said. "Youave a room of your own," and she took the inkstand from Nicholas.
	"In a minute, in a minute," he said, dipping his pen.
	"You always manage to do things at the wrong time," continuedera. "You came rushing into the drawing room so that everyone feltshamed of you."
	Though what she said was quite just, perhaps for that very reason none replied, and the four simply looked at one another. She lingeredn the room with the inkstand in her hand.
	"And at your age what secrets can there be between Natasha andoris, or between you two? It's all nonsense!"
	"Now, Vera, what does it matter to you?" said Natasha in defense,peaking very gently.
	She seemed that day to be more than ever kind and affectionate toveryone.
	"Very silly," said Vera. "I am ashamed of you. Secrets indeed!"
	"All have secrets of their own," answered Natasha, getting warmer.We don't interfere with you and Berg."
	"I should think not," said Vera, "because there can never benything wrong in my behavior. But I'll just tell Mamma how you areehaving with Boris."
	"Natalya Ilynichna behaves very well to me," remarked Boris. "I haveothing to complain of."
	"Don't, Boris! You are such a diplomat that it is reallyiresome," said Natasha in a mortified voice that trembled slightly.She used the word "diplomat," which was just then much in vogue amonghe children, in the special sense they attached to it.) "Why does sheother me?" And she added, turning to Vera, "You'll never understandt, because you've never loved anyone. You have no heart! You are aadame de Genlis and nothing more" (this nickname, bestowed on Vera byicholas, was considered very stinging), "and your greatest pleasures to be unpleasant to people! Go and flirt with Berg as much as youlease," she finished quickly.
	"I shall at any rate not run after a young man before visitors..."
	"Well, now you've done what you wanted," put in Nicholas- "saidnpleasant things to everyone and upset them. Let's go to theursery."
	All four, like a flock of scared birds, got up and left the room.
	"The unpleasant things were said to me," remarked Vera, "I said noneo anyone."
	"Madame de Genlis! Madame de Genlis!" shouted laughing voiceshrough the door.
	The handsome Vera, who produced such an irritating and unpleasantffect on everyone, smiled and, evidently unmoved by what had beenaid to her, went to the looking glass and arranged her hair andcarf. Looking at her own handsome face she seemed to become stillolder and calmer.
	In the drawing room the conversation was still going on.
	"Ah, my dear," said the countess, "my life is not all rosesither. Don't I know that at the rate we are living our means won'tast long? It's all the Club and his easygoing nature. Even in theountry do we get any rest? Theatricals, hunting, and heaven knowshat besides! But don't let's talk about me; tell me how you managedverything. I often wonder at you, Annette- how at your age you canush off alone in a carriage to Moscow, to Petersburg, to thoseinisters and great people, and know how to deal with them all! It'suite astonishing. How did you get things settled? I couldn't possiblyo it."
	"Ah, my love," answered Anna Mikhaylovna, "God grant you nevernow what it is to be left a widow without means and with a son youove to distraction! One learns many things then," she added with aertain pride. "That lawsuit taught me much. When I want to see one ofhose big people I write a note: 'Princess So-and-So desires annterview with So and-So,' and then I take a cab and go myself two,hree, or four times- till I get what I want. I don't mind what theyhink of me."
	"Well, and to whom did you apply about Bory?" asked the countess.You see yours is already an officer in the Guards, while myicholas is going as a cadet. There's no one to interest himself forim. To whom did you apply?"
	"To Prince Vasili. He was so kind. He at once agreed toverything, and put the matter before the Emperor," said Princess Annaikhaylovna enthusiastically, quite forgetting all the humiliation shead endured to gain her end.
	"Has Prince Vasili aged much?" asked the countess. "I have noteen him since we acted together at the Rumyantsovs' theatricals. Ixpect he has forgotten me. He paid me attentions in those days," saidhe countess, with a smile.
	"He is just the same as ever," replied Anna Mikhaylovna,overflowing with amiability. His position has not turned his headt all. He said to me, 'I am sorry I can do so little for you, dearrincess. I am at your command.' Yes, he is a fine fellow and a veryind relation. But, Nataly, you know my love for my son: I would donything for his happiness! And my affairs are in such a bad wayhat my position is now a terrible one," continued Anna Mikhaylovna,adly, dropping her voice. "My wretched lawsuit takes all I have andakes no progress. Would you believe it, I have literally not aenny and don't know how to equip Boris." She took out herandkerchief and began to cry. "I need five hundred rubles, and havenly one twenty-five-ruble note. I am in such a state.... My only hopeow is in Count Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov. If he will not assistis godson- you know he is Bory's godfather- and allow him somethingor his maintenance, all my trouble will have been thrown away.... Ihall not be able to equip him."
	The countess' eyes filled with tears and she pondered in silence.
	"I often think, though, perhaps it's a sin," said the princess,that here lives Count Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov so rich, alllone... that tremendous fortune... and what is his life worth? It's aurden to him, and Bory's life is only just beginning...."
	"Surely he will leave something to Boris," said the countess.
	"Heaven only knows, my dear! These rich grandees are so selfish.till, I will take Boris and go to see him at once, and I shallpeak to him straight out. Let people think what they will of me, it'seally all the same to me when my son's fate is at stake." Therincess rose. "It's now two o'clock and you dine at four. Thereill just be time."
	And like a practical Petersburg lady who knows how to make theost of time, Anna Mikhaylovna sent someone to call her son, andent into the anteroom with him.
	"Good-by, my dear," said she to the countess who saw her to theoor, and added in a whisper so that her son should not hear, "Wish meood luck."
	"Are you going to Count Cyril Vladimirovich, my dear?" said theount coming out from the dining hall into the anteroom, and he added:If he is better, ask Pierre to dine with us. He has been to theouse, you know, and danced with the children. Be sure to inviteim, my dear. We will see how Taras distinguishes himself today. Heays Count Orlov never gave such a dinner as ours will be!"BK1|CH15
	CHAPTER XV
	"My dear Boris," said Princess Anna Mikhaylovna to her son asountess Rostova's carriage in which they were seated drove over thetraw covered street and turned into the wide courtyard of Count Cyrilladimirovich Bezukhov's house. "My dear Boris," said the mother,rawing her hand from beneath her old mantle and laying it timidly andenderly on her son's arm, "be affectionate and attentive to him.ount Cyril Vladimirovich is your godfather after all, your futureepends on him. Remember that, my dear, and be nice to him, as youo well know how to be."
	"If only I knew that anything besides humiliation would come oft..." answered her son coldly. "But I have promised and will do itor your sake."
	Although the hall porter saw someone's carriage standing at thentrance, after scrutinizing the mother and son (who without asking toe announced had passed straight through the glass porch between theows of statues in niches) and looking significantly at the lady's oldloak, he asked whether they wanted the count or the princesses,nd, hearing that they wished to see the count, said his excellencyas worse today, and that his excellency was not receiving anyone.
	"We may as well go back," said the son in French.
	"My dear!" exclaimed his mother imploringly, again laying her handn his arm as if that touch might soothe or rouse him.
	Boris said no more, but looked inquiringly at his mother withoutaking off his cloak.
	"My friend," said Anna Mikhaylovna in gentle tones, addressing theall porter, I know Count Cyril Vladimirovich is very ill... that'shy I have come... I am a relation. I shall not disturb him, myriend... I only need see Prince Vasili Sergeevich: he is stayingere, is he not? Please announce me."
	The hall porter sullenly pulled a bell that rang upstairs, andurned away.
	"Princess Drubetskaya to see Prince Vasili Sergeevich," he called to footman dressed in knee breeches, shoes, and a swallow-tail coat,ho ran downstairs and looked over from the halfway landing.
	The mother smoothed the folds of her dyed silk dress before aarge Venetian mirror in the wall, and in her trodden-down shoesriskly ascended the carpeted stairs.
	"My dear," she said to her son, once more stimulating him by aouch, "you promised me!"
	The son, lowering his eyes, followed her quietly.
	They entered the large hall, from which one of the doors led tohe apartments assigned to Prince Vasili.
	Just as the mother and son, having reached the middle of the hall,ere about to ask their way of an elderly footman who had sprung up ashey entered, the bronze handle of one of the doors turned andrince Vasili came out- wearing a velvet coat with a single star onis breast, as was his custom when at home- taking leave of aood-looking, dark-haired man. This was the celebrated Petersburgoctor, Lorrain.
	"Then it is certain?" said the prince.
	"Prince, humanum est errare,* but..." replied the doctor, swallowingis r's, and pronouncing the Latin words with a French accent.
	*To err is human.
	"Very well, very well..."
	Seeing Anna Mikhaylovna and her son, Prince Vasili dismissed theoctor with a bow and approached them silently and with a look ofnquiry. The son noticed that an expression of profound sorrowuddenly clouded his mother's face, and he smiled slightly.
	"Ah, Prince! In what sad circumstances we meet again! And how is ourear invalid?" said she, as though unaware of the cold offensiveook fixed on her.
	Prince Vasili stared at her and at Boris questioningly anderplexed. Boris bowed politely. Prince Vasili without acknowledginghe bow turned to Anna Mikhaylovna, answering her query by aovement of the head and lips indicating very little hope for theatient.
	"Is it possible?" exclaimed Anna Mikhaylovna. "Oh, how awful! Its terrible to think.... This is my son," she added, indicating Boris.He wanted to thank you himself."
	Boris bowed again politely.
	"Believe me, Prince, a mother's heart will never forget what youave done for us."
	"I am glad I was able to do you a service, my dear Annaikhaylovna," said Prince Vasili, arranging his lace frill, and inone and manner, here in Moscow to Anna Mikhaylovna whom he had placednder an obligation, assuming an air of much greater importance thane had done in Petersburg at Anna Scherer's reception.
	"Try to serve well and show yourself worthy," added he, addressingoris with severity. "I am glad.... Are you here on leave?" he went onn his usual tone of indifference.
	"I am awaiting orders to join my new regiment, your excellency,"eplied Boris, betraying neither annoyance at the prince's brusqueanner nor a desire to enter into conversation, but speaking souietly and respectfully that the prince gave him a searching glance.
	"Are you living with your mother?"
	"I am living at Countess Rostova's," replied Boris, again adding,your excellency."
	"That is, with Ilya Rostov who married Nataly Shinshina," saidnna Mikhaylovna.
	"I know, I know," answered Prince Vasili in his monotonous voice. "Iever could understand how Nataly made up her mind to marry thatnlicked bear! A perfectly absurd and stupid fellow, and a gambleroo, I am told."
	"But a very kind man, Prince," said Anna Mikhaylovna with a patheticmile, as though she too knew that Count Rostov deserved this censure,ut asked him not to be too hard on the poor old man. "What do theoctors say?" asked the princess after a pause, her worn face againxpressing deep sorrow.
	"They give little hope," replied the prince.
	"And I should so like to thank Uncle once for all his kindness to mend Boris. He is his godson," she added, her tone suggesting that thisact ought to give Prince Vasili much satisfaction.
	Prince Vasili became thoughtful and frowned. Anna Mikhaylovna sawhat he was afraid of finding in her a rival for Count Bezukhov'sortune, and hastened to reassure him.
	"If it were not for my sincere affection and devotion to Uncle,"aid she, uttering the word with peculiar assurance and unconcern,I know his character: noble, upright... but you see he has no oneith him except the young princesses.... They are still young...." Sheent her head and continued in a whisper: "Has he performed hisinal duty, Prince? How priceless are those last moments! It canake things no worse, and it is absolutely necessary to prepare him ife is so ill. We women, Prince," and she smiled tenderly, "always knowow to say these things. I absolutely must see him, however painful itay be for me. I am used to suffering."
	Evidently the prince understood her, and also understood, as head done at Anna Pavlovna's, that it would be difficult to get ridf Anna Mikhaylovna.
	"Would not such a meeting be too trying for him, dear Annaikhaylovna?" said he. "Let us wait until evening. The doctors arexpecting a crisis."
	"But one cannot delay, Prince, at such a moment! Consider that theelfare of his soul is at stake. Ah, it is awful: the duties of ahristian..."
	A door of one of the inner rooms opened and one of the princesses,he count's niece, entered with a cold, stern face. The length ofer body was strikingly out of proportion to her short legs. Princeasili turned to her.
	"Well, how is he?"
	"Still the same; but what can you expect, this noise..." said therincess, looking at Anna Mikhaylovna as at a stranger.
	"Ah, my dear, I hardly knew you," said Anna Mikhaylovna with a happymile, ambling lightly up to the count's niece. "I have come, and amt your service to help you nurse my uncle. I imagine what you haveone through," and she sympathetically turned up her eyes.
	The princess gave no reply and did not even smile, but left the roomt Anna Mikhaylovna took off her gloves and, occupying the positionhe had conquered, settled down in an armchair, inviting Prince Vasilio take a seat beside her.
	"Boris," she said to her son with a smile, "I shall go in to see theount, my uncle; but you, my dear, had better go to Pierre meanwhilend don't forget to give him the Rostovs' invitation. They ask himo dinner. I suppose he won't go?" she continued, turning to therince.
	"On the contrary," replied the prince, who had plainly becomeepressed, "I shall be only too glad if you relieve me of that youngan.... Here he is, and the count has not once asked for him."
	He shrugged his shoulders. A footman conducted Boris down one flightf stairs and up another, to Pierre's rooms.BK1|CH16
	CHAPTER XVI
	Pierre, after all, had not managed to choose a career for himself inetersburg, and had been expelled from there for riotous conduct andent to Moscow. The story told about him at Count Rostov's was true.ierre had taken part in tying a policeman to a bear. He had noween for some days in Moscow and was staying as usual at hisather's house. Though he expected that the story of his escapadeould be already known in Moscow and that the ladies about his father-ho were never favorably disposed toward him- would have used it tourn the count against him, he nevertheless on the day of hisrrival went to his father's part of the house. Entering the drawingoom, where the princesses spent most of their time, he greeted theadies, two of whom were sitting at embroidery frames while a thirdead aloud. It was the eldest who was reading- the one who had metnna Mikhaylovna. The two younger ones were embroidering: both wereosy and pretty and they differed only in that one had a little molen her lip which made her much prettier. Pierre was received as ife were a corpse or a leper. The eldest princess paused in her readingnd silently stared at him with frightened eyes; the second assumedrecisely the same expression; while the youngest, the one with theole, who was of a cheerful and lively disposition, bent over herrame to hide a smile probably evoked by the amusing scene sheoresaw. She drew her wool down through the canvas and, scarcelyble to refrain from laughing, stooped as if trying to make out theattern.
	"How do you do, cousin?" said Pierre. "You don't recognize me?"
	"I recognize you only too well, too well."
	"How is the count? Can I see him?" asked Pierre, awkwardly as usual,ut unabashed.
	"The count is suffering physically and mentally, and apparentlyou have done your best to increase his mental sufferings."
	"Can I see the count?" Pierre again asked.
	"Hm.... If you wish to kill him, to kill him outright, you can seeim... Olga, go and see whether Uncle's beef tea is ready- it islmost time," she added, giving Pierre to understand that they wereusy, and busy making his father comfortable, while evidently he,ierre, was only busy causing him annoyance.
	Olga went out. Pierre stood looking at the sisters; then he bowednd said: "Then I will go to my rooms. You will let me know when I canee him."
	And he left the room, followed by the low but ringing laughter ofhe sister with the mole.
	Next day Prince Vasili had arrived and settled in the count's house.e sent for Pierre and said to him: "My dear fellow, if you areoing to behave here as you did in Petersburg, you will end veryadly; that is all I have to say to you. The count is very, veryll, and you must not see him at all."
	Since then Pierre had not been disturbed and had spent the wholeime in his rooms upstairs.
	When Boris appeared at his door Pierre was pacing up and down hisoom, stopping occasionally at a corner to make menacing gestures athe wall, as if running a sword through an invisible foe, andlaring savagely over his spectacles, and then again resuming hisalk, muttering indistinct words, shrugging his shoulders andesticulating.
	"England is done for," said he, scowling and pointing his fingert someone unseen. "Mr. Pitt, as a traitor to the nation and to theights of man, is sentenced to..." But before Pierre- who at thatoment imagined himself to be Napoleon in person and to have justffected the dangerous crossing of the Straits of Dover and capturedondon- could pronounce Pitt's sentence, he saw a well-built andandsome young officer entering his room. Pierre paused. He had leftoscow when Boris was a boy of fourteen, and had quite forgottenim, but in his usual impulsive and hearty way he took Boris by theand with a friendly smile.
	"Do you remember me?" asked Boris quietly with a pleasant smile.I have come with my mother to see the count, but it seems he is notell."
	"Yes, it seems he is ill. People are always disturbing him,"nswered Pierre, trying to remember who this young man was.
	Boris felt that Pierre did not recognize him but did not consider itecessary to introduce himself, and without experiencing the leastmbarrassment looked Pierre straight in the face.
	"Count Rostov asks you to come to dinner today," said he, after aonsiderable pause which made Pierre feel uncomfortable.
	"Ah, Count Rostov!" exclaimed Pierre joyfully. "Then you are hison, Ilya? Only fancy, I didn't know you at first. Do you remember howe went to the Sparrow Hills with Madame Jacquot?... It's such ange..."
	"You are mistaken," said Boris deliberately, with a bold andlightly sarcastic smile. "I am Boris, son of Princess Annaikhaylovna Drubetskaya. Rostov, the father, is Ilya, and his son isicholas. I never knew any Madame Jacquot."
	Pierre shook his head and arms as if attacked by mosquitoes or bees.
	"Oh dear, what am I thinking about? I've mixed everything up. Oneas so many relatives in Moscow! So you are Boris? Of course. Well,ow we know where we are. And what do you think of the Boulognexpedition? The English will come off badly, you know, if Napoleonets across the Channel. I think the expedition is quite feasible.f only Villeneuve doesn't make a mess of things!
	Boris knew nothing about the Boulogne expedition; he did not readhe papers and it was the first time he had heard Villeneuve's name.
	"We here in Moscow are more occupied with dinner parties and scandalhan with politics," said he in his quiet ironical tone. "I knowothing about it and have not thought about it. Moscow is chiefly busyith gossip," he continued. "Just now they are talking about you andour father."
	Pierre smiled in his good-natured way as if afraid for hisompanion's sake that the latter might say something he wouldfterwards regret. But Boris spoke distinctly, clearly, and dryly,ooking straight into Pierre's eyes.
	"Moscow has nothing else to do but gossip," Boris went on.Everybody is wondering to whom the count will leave his fortune,hough he may perhaps outlive us all, as I sincerely hope he will..."
	"Yes, it is all very horrid," interrupted Pierre, "very horrid."
	Pierre was still afraid that this officer might inadvertently sayomething disconcerting to himself.
	"And it must seem to you," said Boris flushing slightly, but nothanging his tone or attitude, "it must seem to you that everyone isrying to get something out of the rich man?"
	"So it does," thought Pierre.
	"But I just wish to say, to avoid misunderstandings, that you areuite mistaken if you reckon me or my mother among such people. We areery poor, but for my own part at any rate, for the very reason thatour father is rich, I don't regard myself as a relation of his, andeither I nor my mother would ever ask or take anything from him."
	For a long time Pierre could not understand, but when he did, heumped up from the sofa, seized Boris under the elbow in his quick,lumsy way, and, blushing far more than Boris, began to speak with aeeling of mingled shame and vexation.
	"Well, this is strange! Do you suppose I... who could think?... Inow very well..."
	But Boris again interrupted him.
	"I am glad I have spoken out fully. Perhaps you did not like it? Youust excuse me," said he, putting Pierre at ease instead of beingut at ease by him, "but I hope I have not offended you. I always maket a rule to speak out... Well, what answer am I to take? Will youome to dinner at the Rostovs'?"
	And Boris, having apparently relieved himself of an onerous duty andxtricated himself from an awkward situation and placed another in it,ecame quite pleasant again.
	"No, but I say," said Pierre, calming down, "you are a wonderfulellow! What you have just said is good, very good. Of course youon't know me. We have not met for such a long time... not since weere children. You might think that I... I understand, quitenderstand. I could not have done it myself, I should not have had theourage, but it's splendid. I am very glad to have made yourcquaintance. It's queer," he added after a pause, "that you shouldave suspected me!" He began to laugh. "Well, what of it! I hope we'llet better acquainted," and he pressed Boris' hand. "Do you know, Iave not once been in to see the count. He has not sent for me.... Im sorry for him as a man, but what can one do?"
	"And so you think Napoleon will manage to get an army across?" askedoris with a smile.
	Pierre saw that Boris wished to change the subject, and being of theame mind he began explaining the advantages and disadvantages ofhe Boulogne expedition.
	A footman came in to summon Boris- the princess was going. Pierre,n order to make Boris' better acquaintance, promised to come toinner, and warmly pressing his hand looked affectionately over hispectacles into Boris' eyes. After he had gone Pierre continued pacingp and down the room for a long time, no longer piercing anmaginary foe with his imaginary sword, but smiling at the remembrancef that pleasant, intelligent, and resolute young man.
	As often happens in early youth, especially to one who leads aonely life, he felt an unaccountable tenderness for this young mannd made up his mind that they would be friends.
	Prince Vasili saw the princess off. She held a handkerchief to heryes and her face was tearful.
	"It is dreadful, dreadful!" she was saying, "but cost me what it may shall do my duty. I will come and spend the night. He must not beeft like this. Every moment is precious. I can't think why his niecesut it off. Perhaps God will help me to find a way to prepareim!... Adieu, Prince! May God support you..."
	"Adieu, ma bonne," answered Prince Vasili turning away from her.
	"Oh, he is in a dreadful state," said the mother to her son whenhey were in the carriage. "He hardly recognizes anybody."
	"I don't understand, Mamma- what is his attitude to Pierre?" askedhe son.
	"The will will show that, my dear; our fate also depends on it."
	"But why do you expect that he will leave us anything?"
	"Ah, my dear! He is so rich, and we are so poor!"
	"Well, that is hardly a sufficient reason, Mamma..."
	"Oh, Heaven! How ill he is!" exclaimed the mother.BK1|CH17
	CHAPTER XVII
	After Anna Mikhaylovna had driven off with her son to visit Countyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov, Countess Rostova sat for a long time alllone applying her handkerchief to her eyes. At last she rang.
	"What is the matter with you, my dear?" she said crossly to the maidho kept her waiting some minutes. "Don't you wish to serve me? Then'll find you another place."
	The countess was upset by her friend's sorrow and humiliatingoverty, and was therefore out of sorts, a state of mind which wither always found expression in calling her maid "my dear" and speakingo her with exaggerated politeness.
	"I am very sorry, ma'am," answered the maid.
	"Ask the count to come to me."
	The count came waddling in to see his wife with a rather guilty looks usual.
	"Well, little countess? What a saute of game au madere we are toave, my dear! I tasted it. The thousand rubles I paid for Tarasere not ill-spent. He is worth it!"
	He sat down by his wife, his elbows on his knees and his handsuffling his gray hair.
	"What are your commands, little countess?"
	"You see, my dear... What's that mess?" she said, pointing to hisaistcoat. "It's, the saute, most likely," she added with a smile.Well, you see, Count, I want some money."
	Her face became sad.
	"Oh, little countess!"... and the count began bustling to get outis pocketbook.
	"I want a great deal, Count! I want five hundred rubles," and takingut her cambric handkerchief she began wiping her husband's waistcoat.
	"Yes, immediately, immediately! Hey, who's there?" he called outn a tone only used by persons who are certain that those they callill rush to obey the summons. "Send Dmitri to me!"
	Dmitri, a man of good family who had been brought up in theount's house and now managed all his affairs, stepped softly into theoom.
	"This is what I want, my dear fellow," said the count to theeferential young man who had entered. "Bring me..." he reflected aoment, "yes, bring me seven hundred rubles, yes! But mind, don'tring me such tattered and dirty notes as last time, but nice cleannes for the countess."
	"Yes, Dmitri, clean ones, please," said the countess, sighingeeply.
	"When would you like them, your excellency?" asked Dmitri. "Allow meo inform you... But, don't be uneasy," he added, noticing that theount was beginning to breathe heavily and quickly which was always sign of approaching anger. "I was forgetting... Do you wish itrought at once?"
	"Yes, yes; just so! Bring it. Give it to the countess."
	"What a treasure that Dmitri is," added the count with a smilehen the young man had departed. "There is never any 'impossible' withim. That's a thing I hate! Everything is possible."
	"Ah, money, Count, money! How much sorrow it causes in the world,"aid the countess. "But I am in great need of this sum."
	"You, my little countess, are a notorious spendthrift," said theount, and having kissed his wife's hand he went back to his study.
	When Anna Mikhaylovna returned from Count Bezukhov's the money,ll in clean notes, was lying ready under a handkerchief on theountess' little table, and Anna Mikhaylovna noticed that somethingas agitating her.
	"Well, my dear?" asked the countess.
	"Oh, what a terrible state he is in! One would not know him, he iso ill! I was only there a few moments and hardly said a word..."
	"Annette, for heaven's sake don't refuse me," the countess began,ith a blush that looked very strange on her thin, dignified,lderly face, and she took the money from under the handkerchief.
	Anna Mikhaylovna instantly guessed her intention and stooped to beeady to embrace the countess at the appropriate moment.
	"This is for Boris from me, for his outfit."
	Anna Mikhaylovna was already embracing her and weeping. The countessept too. They wept because they were friends, and because they wereindhearted, and because they- friends from childhood- had to thinkbout such a base thing as money, and because their youth was over....ut those tears were pleasant to them both.BK1|CH18
	CHAPTER XVIII
	Countess Rostova, with her daughters and a large number of guests,as already seated in the drawing room. The count took the gentlemennto his study and showed them his choice collection of Turkish pipes.rom time to time he went out to ask: "Hasn't she come yet?" They werexpecting Marya Dmitrievna Akhrosimova, known in society as leerrible dragon, a lady distinguished not for wealth or rank, butor common sense and frank plainness of speech. Marya Dmitrievna wasnown to the Imperial family as well as to all Moscow andetersburg, and both cities wondered at her, laughed privately ater rudenesses, and told good stories about her, while none the lessll without exception respected and feared her.
	In the count's room, which was full of tobacco smoke, they talked ofar that had been announced in a manifesto, and about theecruiting. None of them had yet seen the manifesto, but they all knewt had appeared. The count sat on the sofa between two guests who weremoking and talking. He neither smoked nor talked, but bending hisead first to one side and then to the other watched the smokersith evident pleasure and listened to the conversation of his twoeighbors, whom he egged on against each other.
	One of them was a sallow, clean-shaven civilian with a thin andrinkled face, already growing old, though he was dressed like aost fashionable young man. He sat with his legs up on the sofa asf quite at home and, having stuck an amber mouthpiece far into hisouth, was inhaling the smoke spasmodically and screwing up hisyes. This was an old bachelor, Shinshin, a cousin of the countess', aan with "a sharp tongue" as they said in Moscow society. He seemed toe condescending to his companion. The latter, a fresh, rosy officerf the Guards, irreproachably washed, brushed, and buttoned, heldis pipe in the middle of his mouth and with red lips gently inhaledhe smoke, letting it escape from his handsome mouth in rings. Thisas Lieutenant Berg, an officer in the Semenov regiment with whomoris was to travel to join the army, and about whom Natasha had,eased her elder sister Vera, speaking of Berg as her "intended."he count sat between them and listened attentively. His favoriteccupation when not playing boston, a card game he was very fond of,as that of listener, especially when he succeeded in setting twooquacious talkers at one another.
	"Well, then, old chap, mon tres honorable Alphonse Karlovich,"aid Shinshin, laughing ironically and mixing the most ordinaryussian expressions with the choicest French phrases- which was aeculiarity of his speech. "Vous comptez vous faire des rentes sur'etat;* you want to make something out of your company?"
	*You expect to make an income out of the government.
	"No, Peter Nikolaevich; I only want to show that in the cavalryhe advantages are far less than in the infantry. Just consider my ownosition now, Peter Nikolaevich..."
	Berg always spoke quietly, politely, and with great precision. Hisonversation always related entirely to himself; he would remainalm and silent when the talk related to any topic that had noirect bearing on himself. He could remain silent for hours withouteing at all put out of countenance himself or making othersncomfortable, but as soon as the conversation concerned himself heould begin to talk circumstantially and with evident satisfaction.
	"Consider my position, Peter Nikolaevich. Were I in the cavalry Ihould get not more than two hundred rubles every four months, evenith the rank of lieutenant; but as it is I receive two hundred andhirty," said he, looking at Shinshin and the count with a joyful,leasant smile, as if it were obvious to him that his success mustlways be the chief desire of everyone else.
	"Besides that, Peter Nikolaevich, by exchanging into the Guards Ihall be in a more prominent position," continued Berg, "and vacanciesccur much more frequently in the Foot Guards. Then just think whatan be done with two hundred and thirty rubles! I even manage to put aittle aside and to send something to my father," he went on, emitting smoke ring.
	"La balance y est...* A German knows how to skin a flint, as theroverb says," remarked Shinshin, moving his pipe to the other side ofis mouth and winking at the count.
	*So that squares matters.
	The count burst out laughing. The other guests seeing thathinshin was talking came up to listen. Berg, oblivious of irony orndifference, continued to explain how by exchanging into the Guardse had already gained a step on his old comrades of the Cadet Corps;ow in wartime the company commander might get killed and he, asenior in the company, might easily succeed to the post; how populare was with everyone in the regiment, and how satisfied his father wasith him. Berg evidently enjoyed narrating all this, and did noteem to suspect that others, too, might have their own interests.ut all he said was so prettily sedate, and the naivete of hisouthful egotism was so obvious, that he disarmed his hearers.
	"Well, my boy, you'll get along wherever you go- foot or horse- that'll warrant," said Shinshin, patting him on the shoulder and takingis feet off the sofa.
	Berg smiled joyously. The count, by his guests, went into therawing room.
	It was just the moment before a big dinner when the assembleduests, expecting the summons to zakuska,* avoid engaging in anyong conversation but think it necessary to move about and talk, inrder to show that they are not at all impatient for their food. Theost and hostess look toward the door, and now and then glance atne another, and the visitors try to guess from these glances who,r what, they are waiting for- some important relation who has not yetrrived, or a dish that is not yet ready.
	*Hors d'oeuvres.
	Pierre had come just at dinnertime and was sitting awkwardly inhe middle of the drawing room on the first chair he had comecross, blocking the way for everyone. The countess tried to makeim talk, but he went on naively looking around through his spectacless if in search of somebody and answered all her questions inonosyllables. He was in the way and was the only one who did nototice the fact. Most of the guests, knowing of the affair with theear, looked with curiosity at this big, stout, quiet man, wonderingow such a clumsy, modest fellow could have played such a prank on aoliceman.
	"You have only lately arrived?" the countess asked him.
	"Oui, madame," replied he, looking around him.
	"You have not yet seen my husband?"
	"Non, madame." He smiled quite inappropriately.
	"You have been in Paris recently, I believe? I suppose it's verynteresting."
	"Very interesting."
	The countess exchanged glances with Anna Mikhaylovna. The latternderstood that she was being asked to entertain this young man, anditting down beside him she began to speak about his father; but henswered her, as he had the countess, only in monosyllables. The otheruests were all conversing with one another. "The Razumovskis... Itas charming... You are very kind... Countess Apraksina..." waseard on all sides. The countess rose and went into the ballroom.
	"Marya Dmitrievna?" came her voice from there.
	"Herself," came the answer in a rough voice, and Marya Dmitrievnantered the room.
	All the unmarried ladies and even the married ones except the veryldest rose. Marya Dmitrievna paused at the door. Tall and stout,olding high her fifty-year-old head with its gray curls, she stoodurveying the guests, and leisurely arranged her wide sleeves as ifolling them up. Marya Dmitrievna always spoke in Russian.
	"Health and happiness to her whose name day we are keeping and toer children," she said, in her loud, full-toned voice which drownedll others. "Well, you old sinner," she went on, turning to theount who was kissing her hand, "you're feeling dull in Moscow, Iaresay? Nowhere to hunt with your dogs? But what is to be done, oldan? Just see how these nestlings are growing up," and she pointedo the girls. "You must look for husbands for them whether you like itr not...."
	Well," said she, "how's my Cossack?" (Marya Dmitrievna always calledatasha a Cossack) and she stroked the child's arm as she came upearless and gay to kiss her hand. "I know she's a scamp of a girl,ut I like her."
	She took a pair of pear-shaped ruby earrings from her hugeeticule and, having given them to the rosy Natasha, who beamed withhe pleasure of her saint's-day fete, turned away at once andddressed herself to Pierre.
	"Eh, eh, friend! Come here a bit," said she, assuming a soft highone of voice. "Come here, my friend..." and she ominously tucked uper sleeves still higher. Pierre approached, looking at her in ahildlike way through his spectacles.
	"Come nearer, come nearer, friend! I used to be the only one to tellour father the truth when he was in favor, and in your case it's myvident duty." She paused. All were silent, expectant of what was toollow, for this was dearly only a prelude.
	"A fine lad! My word! A fine lad!... His father lies on his deathbednd he amuses himself setting a policeman astride a bear! For shame,ir, for shame! It would be better if you went to the war."
	She turned away and gave her hand to the count, who could hardlyeep from laughing.
	"Well, I suppose it is time we were at table?" said Maryamitrievna.
	The count went in first with Marya Dmitrievna, the countess followedn the arm of a colonel of hussars, a man of importance to themecause Nicholas was to go with him to the regiment; then came Annaikhaylovna with Shinshin. Berg gave his arm to Vera. The smilingulie Karagina went in with Nicholas. After them other couplesollowed, filling the whole dining hall, and last of all the children,utors, and governesses followed singly. The footmen began movingbout, chairs scraped, the band struck up in the gallery, and theuests settled down in their places. Then the strains of the count'sousehold band were replaced by the clatter of knives and forks, theoices of visitors, and the soft steps of the footmen. At one end ofhe table sat the countess with Marya Dmitrievna on her right and Annaikhaylovna on her left, the other lady visitors were farther down. Athe other end sat the count, with the hussar colonel on his left andhinshin and the other male visitors on his right. Midway down theong table on one side sat the grownup young people: Vera beside Berg,nd Pierre beside Boris; and on the other side, the children,utors, and governesses. From behind the crystal decanters and fruitases the count kept glancing at his wife and her tall cap with itsight-blue ribbons, and busily filled his neighbors' glasses, noteglecting his own. The countess in turn, without omitting heruties as hostess, threw significant glances from behind theineapples at her husband whose face and bald head seemed by theiredness to contrast more than usual with his gray hair. At the ladies'nd an even chatter of voices was heard all the time, at the men's endhe voices sounded louder and louder, especially that of the colonelf hussars who, growing more and more flushed, ate and drank so muchhat the count held him up as a pattern to the other guests. Berg withender smiles was saying to Vera that love is not an earthly but aeavenly feeling. Boris was telling his new friend Pierre who theuests were and exchanging glances with Natasha, who was sittingpposite. Pierre spoke little but examined the new faces, and ate areat deal. Of the two soups he chose turtle with savory patties andent on to the game without omitting a single dish or one of theines. These latter the butler thrust mysteriously forward, wrapped in napkin, from behind the next man's shoulders and whispered: "Dryadeira"... "Hungarian"... or "Rhine wine" as the case might be. Ofhe four crystal glasses engraved with the count's monogram that stoodefore his plate, Pierre held out one at random and drank withnjoyment, gazing with ever-increasing amiability at the other guests.atasha, who sat opposite, was looking at Boris as girls of thirteenook at the boy they are in love with and have just kissed for theirst time. Sometimes that same look fell on Pierre, and that funnyively little girl's look made him inclined to laugh without knowinghy.
	Nicholas sat at some distance from Sonya, beside Julie Karagina,o whom he was again talking with the same involuntary smile. Sonyaore a company smile but was evidently tormented by jealousy; nowhe turned pale, now blushed and strained every nerve to overhear whaticholas and Julie were saying to one another. The governess keptooking round uneasily as if preparing to resent any slight that mighte put upon the children. The German tutor was trying to rememberll the dishes, wines, and kinds of dessert, in order to send a fullescription of the dinner to his people in Germany; and he feltreatly offended when the butler with a bottle wrapped in a napkinassed him by. He frowned, trying to appear as if he did not wantny of that wine, but was mortified because no one would understandhat it was not to quench his thirst or from greediness that he wantedt, but simply from a conscientious desire for knowledge.BK1|CH19
	CHAPTER XIX
	At the men's end of the table the talk grew more and morenimated. The colonel told them that the declaration of war hadlready appeared in Petersburg and that a copy, which he had himselfeen, had that day been forwarded by courier to the commander inhief.
	"And why the deuce are we going to fight Bonaparte?" remarkedhinshin. "He has stopped Austria's cackle and I fear it will be oururn next."
	The colonel was a stout, tall, plethoric German, evidently devotedo the service and patriotically Russian. He resented Shinshin'semark.
	"It is for the reasson, my goot sir," said he, speaking with aerman accent, "for the reasson zat ze Emperor knows zat. Heeclares in ze manifessto zat he cannot fiew wiz indifference zeanger vreatening Russia and zat ze safety and dignity of ze Empire asell as ze sanctity of its alliances..." he spoke this last wordith particular emphasis as if in it lay the gist of the matter.
	Then with the unerring official memory that characterized him heepeated from the opening words of the manifesto:
	... and the wish, which constitutes the Emperor's sole andbsolute aim- to establish peace in Europe on firm foundations- hasow decided him to despatch part of the army abroad and to create aew condition for the attainment of that purpose.
	"Zat, my dear sir, is vy..." he concluded, drinking a tumbler ofine with dignity and looking to the count for approval.
	"Connaissez-vous le Proverbe:* 'Jerome, Jerome, do not roam, buturn spindles at home!'?" said Shinshin, puckering his brows andmiling. "Cela nous convient a merveille.*[2] Suvorov now- he knewhat he was about; yet they beat him a plate couture,*[3] and wherere we to find Suvorovs now? Je vous demande un peu,"*[4] said he,ontinually changing from French to Russian.
	*Do you know the proverb?
	*[2] That suits us down to the ground.
	*[3] Hollow.
	*[4] I just ask you that.
	"Ve must vight to the last tr-r-op of our plood!" said theolonel, thumping the table; "and ve must tie for our Emperor, and zenll vill pe vell. And ve must discuss it as little as po-o-ossible"...e dwelt particularly on the word possible... "as po-o-ossible," hended, again turning to the count. "Zat is how ve old hussars lookt it, and zere's an end of it! And how do you, a young man and aoung hussar, how do you judge of it?" he added, addressingicholas, who when he heard that the war was being discussed hadurned from his partner with eyes and ears intent on the colonel.
	"I am quite of your opinion," replied Nicholas, flaming up,urning his plate round and moving his wineglasses about with asuch decision and desperation as though he were at that momentacing some great danger. "I am convinced that we Russians must die oronquer," he concluded, conscious- as were others- after the wordsere uttered that his remarks were too enthusiastic and emphatic forhe occasion and were therefore awkward.
	"What you said just now was splendid!" said his partner Julie.
	Sonya trembled all over and blushed to her ears and behind themnd down to her neck and shoulders while Nicholas was speaking.
	Pierre listened to the colonel's speech and nodded approvingly.
	"That's fine," said he.
	"The young man's a real hussar!" shouted the colonel, again thumpinghe table.
	"What are you making such a noise about over there?" Maryamitrievna's deep voice suddenly inquired from the other end of theable. "What are you thumping the table for?" she demanded of theussar, "and why are you exciting yourself? Do you think the Frenchre here?"
	"I am speaking ze truce," replied the hussar with a smile.
	"It's all about the war," the count shouted down the table. "Younow my son's going, Marya Dmitrievna? My son is going."
	"I have four sons in the army but still I don't fret. It is all inod's hands. You may die in your bed or God may spare you in aattle," replied Marya Dmitrievna's deep voice, which easily carriedhe whole length of the table.
	"That's true!"
	Once more the conversations concentrated, the ladies' at the one endnd the men's at the other.
	"You won't ask," Natasha's little brother was saying; "I know youon't ask!"
	"I will," replied Natasha.
	Her face suddenly flushed with reckless and joyous resolution. Shealf rose, by a glance inviting Pierre, who sat opposite, to listen tohat was coming, and turning to her mother:
	"Mamma!" rang out the clear contralto notes of her childish voice,udible the whole length of the table.
	"What is it?" asked the countess, startled; but seeing by heraughter's face that it was only mischief, she shook a finger at herternly with a threatening and forbidding movement of her head.
	The conversation was hushed.
	"Mamma! What sweets are we going to have?" and Natasha's voiceounded still more firm and resolute.
	The countess tried to frown, but could not. Marya Dmitrievna shooker fat finger.
	"Cossack!" she said threateningly.
	Most of the guests, uncertain how to regard this sally, looked athe elders.
	"You had better take care!" said the countess.
	"Mamma! What sweets are we going to have?" Natasha again criedoldly, with saucy gaiety, confident that her prank would be takenn good part.
	Sonya and fat little Petya doubled up with laughter.
	"You see! I have asked," whispered Natasha to her little brother ando Pierre, glancing at him again.
	"Ice pudding, but you won't get any," said Marya Dmitrievna.
	Natasha saw there was nothing to be afraid of and so she braved evenarya Dmitrievna.
	"Marya Dmitrievna! What kind of ice pudding? I don't like iceream."
	"Carrot ices."
	"No! What kind, Marya Dmitrievna? What kind?" she almost screamed;I want to know!"
	Marya Dmitrievna and the countess burst out laughing, and all theuests joined in. Everyone laughed, not at Marya Dmitrievna's answerut at the incredible boldness and smartness of this little girl whoad dared to treat Marya Dmitrievna in this fashion.
	Natasha only desisted when she had been told that there would beineapple ice. Before the ices, champagne was served round. The bandgain struck up, the count and countess kissed, and the guests,eaving their seats, went up to "congratulate" the countess, andeached across the table to clink glasses with the count, with thehildren, and with one another. Again the footmen rushed about, chairscraped, and in the same order in which they had entered but withedder faces, the guests returned to the drawing room and to theount's study.BK1|CH20
	CHAPTER XX
	The card tables were drawn out, sets made up for boston, and theount's visitors settled themselves, some in the two drawing rooms,ome in the sitting room, some in the library.
	The count, holding his cards fanwise, kept himself with difficultyrom dropping into his usual after-dinner nap, and laughed atverything. The young people, at the countess' instigation, gatheredound the clavichord and harp. Julie by general request playedirst. After she had played a little air with variations on thearp, she joined the other young ladies in begging Natasha andicholas, who were noted for their musical talent, to singomething. Natasha, who was treated as though she were grown up, wasvidently very proud of this but at the same time felt shy.
	"What shall we sing?" she said.
	"'The Brook,'" suggested Nicholas.
	"Well, then,let's be quick. Boris, come here," said Natasha. "Buthere is Sonya?"
	She looked round and seeing that her friend was not in the rooman to look for her.
	Running into Sonya's room and not finding her there, Natasha rano the nursery, but Sonya was not there either. Natasha concluded thathe must be on the chest in the passage. The chest in the passageas the place of mourning for the younger female generation in theostov household. And there in fact was Sonya lying face downward onurse's dirty feather bed on the top of the chest, crumpling her gauzyink dress under her, hiding her face with her slender fingers, andobbing so convulsively that her bare little shoulders shook.atasha's face, which had been so radiantly happy all that saint'say, suddenly changed: her eyes became fixed, and then a shiver passedown her broad neck and the corners of her mouth drooped.
	"Sonya! What is it? What is the matter?... Oo... Oo... Oo...!" Andatasha's large mouth widened, making her look quite ugly, and sheegan to wail like a baby without knowing why, except that Sonya wasrying. Sonya tried to lift her head to answer but could not, andid her face still deeper in the bed. Natasha wept, sitting on thelue-striped feather bed and hugging her friend. With an effortonya sat up and began wiping her eyes and explaining.
	"Nicholas is going away in a week's time, his... papers... haveome... he told me himself... but still I should not cry," and shehowed a paper she held in her hand- with the verses Nicholas hadritten, "still, I should not cry, but you can't... no one cannderstand... what a soul he has!"
	And she began to cry again because he had such a noble soul.
	"It's all very well for you... I am not envious... I love you andoris also," she went on, gaining a little strength; "he is nice...here are no difficulties in your way.... But Nicholas is my cousin...ne would have to... the Metropolitan himself... and even then itan't be done. And besides, if she tells Mamma" (Sonya looked upon theountess as her mother and called her so) "that I am spoilingicholas' career and am heartless and ungrateful, while truly... Gods my witness," and she made the sign of the cross, "I love her souch, and all of you, only Vera... And what for? What have I done toer? I am so grateful to you that I would willingly sacrificeverything, only I have nothing...."
	Sonya could not continue, and again hid her face in her hands and inhe feather bed. Natasha began consoling her, but her face showed thathe understood all the gravity of her friend's trouble.
	"Sonya," she suddenly exclaimed, as if she had guessed the trueeason of her friend's sorrow, "I'm sure Vera has said something toou since dinner? Hasn't she?"
	"Yes, these verses Nicholas wrote himself and I copied somethers, and she found them on my table and said she'd show them toamma, and that I was ungrateful, and that Mamma would never allow himo marry me, but that he'll marry Julie. You see how he's been wither all day... Natasha, what have I done to deserve it?..."
	And again she began to sob, more bitterly than before. Natashaifted her up, hugged her, and, smiling through her tears, beganomforting her.
	"Sonya, don't believe her, darling! Don't believe her! Do youemember how we and Nicholas, all three of us, talked in the sittingoom after supper? Why, we settled how everything was to be. I don'tuite remember how, but don't you remember that it could all berranged and how nice it all was? There's Uncle Shinshin's brother hasarried his first cousin. And we are only second cousins, you know.nd Boris says it is quite possible. You know I have told him allbout it. And he is so clever and so good!" said Natasha. "Don't youry, Sonya, dear love, darling Sonya!" and she kissed her and laughed.Vera's spiteful; never mind her! And all will come right and sheon't say anything to Mamma. Nicholas will tell her himself, and heoesn't care at all for Julie."
	Natasha kissed her on the hair.
	Sonya sat up. The little kitten brightened, its eyes shone, and iteemed ready to lift its tail, jump down on its soft paws, and beginlaying with the ball of worsted as a kitten should.
	"Do you think so?... Really? Truly?" she said, quickly smoothing herrock and hair.
	"Really, truly!" answered Natasha, pushing in a crisp lock thatad strayed from under her friend's plaits.
	Both laughed.
	"Well, let's go and sing 'The Brook.'"
	"Come along!"
	"Do you know, that fat Pierre who sat opposite me is so funny!" saidatasha, stopping suddenly. "I feel so happy!"
	And she set off at a run along the passage.
	Sonya, shaking off some down which clung to her and tucking away theerses in the bosom of her dress close to her bony little chest, ranfter Natasha down the passage into the sitting room with flushed facend light, joyous steps. At the visitors' request the young peopleang the quartette, "The Brook," with which everyone was delighted.hen Nicholas sang a song he had just learned:
	   At nighttime in the moon's fair glow
	     How sweet, as fancies wander free,
	   To feel that in this world there's one
	     Who still is thinking but of thee!
	   That while her fingers touch the harp
	     Wafting sweet music music the lea,
	   It is for thee thus swells her heart,
	     Sighing its message out to thee...
	   A day or two, then bliss unspoilt,
	     But oh! till then I cannot live!...
	He had not finished the last verse before the young people begano get ready to dance in the large hall, and the sound of the feet andhe coughing of the musicians were heard from the gallery.
	Pierre was sitting in the drawing-room where Shinshin had engagedim, as a man recently returned from abroad, in a politicalonversation in which several others joined but which bored Pierre.hen the music began Natasha came in and walking straight up to Pierreaid, laughing and blushing:
	"Mamma told me to ask you to join the dancers."
	"I am afraid of mixing the figures," Pierre replied; "but if youill be my teacher..." And lowering his big arm he offered it to thelender little girl.
	While the couples were arranging themselves and the musicians tuningp, Pierre sat down with his little partner. Natasha was perfectlyappy; she was dancing with a grown-up man, who had been abroad. Sheas sitting in a conspicuous place and talking to him like arown-up lady. She had a fan in her hand that one of the ladies hadiven her to hold. Assuming quite the pose of a society womanheaven knows when and where she had learned it) she talked with herartner, fanning herself and smiling over the fan.
	"Dear, dear! Just look at her!" exclaimed the countess as sherossed the ballroom, pointing to Natasha.
	Natasha blushed and laughed.
	"Well, really, Mamma! Why should you? What is there to beurprised at?"
	In the midst of the third ecossaise there was a clatter of chairseing pushed back in the sitting room where the count and Maryamitrievna had been playing cards with the majority of the moreistinguished and older visitors. They now, stretching themselvesfter sitting so long, and replacing their purses and pocketbooks,ntered the ballroom. First came Marya Dmitrievna and the count,oth with merry countenances. The count, with playful ceremonyomewhat in ballet style, offered his bent arm to Marya Dmitrievna. Herew himself up, a smile of debonair gallantry lit up his face ands soon as the last figure of the ecossaise was ended, he clappedis hands to the musicians and shouted up to their gallery, addressinghe first violin:
	"Semen! Do you know the Daniel Cooper?"
	This was the count's favorite dance, which he had danced in hisouth. (Strictly speaking, Daniel Cooper was one figure of thenglaise.)
	"Look at Papa!" shouted Natasha to the whole company, and quiteorgetting that she was dancing with a grown-up partner she bent herurly head to her knees and made the whole room ring with heraughter.
	And indeed everybody in the room looked with a smile of pleasuret the jovial old gentleman, who standing beside his tall and stoutartner, Marya Dmitrievna, curved his arms, beat time, straightenedis shoulders, turned out his toes, tapped gently with his foot,nd, by a smile that broadened his round face more and more,repared the onlookers for what was to follow. As soon as therovocatively gay strains of Daniel Cooper (somewhat resemblinghose of a merry peasant dance) began to sound, all the doorways ofhe ballroom were suddenly filled by the domestic serfs- the men onne side and the women on the other- who with beaming faces had comeo see their master making merry.
	"Just look at the master! A regular eagle he is!" loudly remarkedhe nurse, as she stood in one of the doorways.
	The count danced well and knew it. But his partner could not and didot want to dance well. Her enormous figure stood erect, herowerful arms hanging down (she had handed her reticule to theountess), and only her stern but handsome face really joined in theance. What was expressed by the whole of the count's plump figure, inarya Dmitrievna found expression only in her more and more beamingace and quivering nose. But if the count, getting more and morento the swing of it, charmed the spectators by the unexpectednessf his adroit maneuvers and the agility with which he capered about onis light feet, Marya Dmitrievna produced no less impression by slightxertions- the least effort to move her shoulders or bend her armshen turning, or stamp her foot- which everyone appreciated in view ofer size and habitual severity. The dance grew livelier andivelier. The other couples could not attract a moment's attentiono their own evolutions and did not even try to do so. All wereatching the count and Marya Dmitrievna. Natasha kept pulling everyoney sleeve or dress, urging them to "look at Papa!" though as it washey never took their eyes off the couple. In the intervals of theance the count, breathing deeply, waved and shouted to theusicians to play faster. Faster, faster, and faster; lightly, moreightly, and yet more lightly whirled the count, flying round Maryamitrievna, now on his toes, now on his heels; until, turning hisartner round to her seat, he executed the final pas, raising his softoot backwards, bowing his perspiring head, smiling and making aide sweep with his arm, amid a thunder of applause and laughter ledy Natasha. Both partners stood still, breathing heavily and wipingheir faces with their cambric handkerchiefs.
	"That's how we used to dance in our time, ma chere," said the count.
	"That was a Daniel Cooper!" exclaimed Marya Dmitrievna, tucking uper sleeves and puffing heavily.BK1|CH21
	CHAPTER XXI
	While in the Rostovs' ballroom the sixth anglaise was beinganced, to a tune in which the weary musicians blundered, and whileired footmen and cooks were getting the supper, Count Bezukhov had sixth stroke. The doctors pronounced recovery impossible. After aute confession, communion was administered to the dying man,reparations made for the sacrament of unction, and in his house thereas the bustle and thrill of suspense usual at such moments. Outsidehe house, beyond the gates, a group of undertakers, who hidhenever a carriage drove up, waited in expectation of an importantrder for an expensive funeral. The Military Governor of Moscow, whoad been assiduous in sending aides-de-camp to inquire after theount's health, came himself that evening to bid a last farewell tohe celebrated grandee of Catherine's court, Count Bezukhov.
	The magnificent reception room was crowded. Everyone stood upespectfully when the Military Governor, having stayed about half anour alone with the dying man, passed out, slightly acknowledgingheir bows and trying to escape as quickly as from the glances fixedn him by the doctors, clergy, and relatives of the family. Princeasili, who had grown thinner and paler during the last few days,scorted him to the door, repeating something to him several timesn low tones.
	When the Military Governor had gone, Prince Vasili sat down alllone on a chair in the ballroom, crossing one leg high over thether, leaning his elbow on his knee and covering his face with hisand. After sitting so for a while he rose, and, looking about himith frightened eyes, went with unusually hurried steps down theong corridor leading to the back of the house, to the room of theldest princess.
	Those who were in the dimly lit reception room spoke in nervoushispers, and, whenever anyone went into or came from the dyingan's room, grew silent and gazed with eyes full of curiosity orxpectancy at his door, which creaked slightly when opened.
	"The limits of human life... are fixed and may not be o'erpassed,"aid an old priest to a lady who had taken a seat beside him and wasistening naively to his words.
	"I wonder, is it not too late to administer unction?" asked theady, adding the priest's clerical title, as if she had no opinionf her own on the subject.
	"Ah, madam, it is a great sacrament, "replied the priest, passingis hand over the thin grizzled strands of hair combed back across hisald head.
	"Who was that? The Military Governor himself?" was being asked athe other side of the room. "How young-looking he is!"
	"Yes, and he is over sixty. I hear the count no longer recognizesnyone. They wished to administer the sacrament of unction."
	"I knew someone who received that sacrament seven times."
	The second princess had just come from the sickroom with her eyesed from weeping and sat down beside Dr. Lorrain, who was sitting in araceful pose under a portrait of Catherine, leaning his elbow on aable.
	"Beautiful," said the doctor in answer to a remark about theeather. "The weather is beautiful, Princess; and besides, in Moscowne feels as if one were in the country."
	"Yes, indeed," replied the princess with a sigh. "So he may haveomething to drink?"
	Lorrain considered.
	"Has he taken his medicine?"
	"Yes."
	The doctor glanced at his watch.
	"Take a glass of boiled water and put a pinch of cream of tartar,"nd he indicated with his delicate fingers what he meant by a pinch.
	"Dere has neffer been a gase," a German doctor was saying to anide-de-camp, "dat one liffs after de sird stroke."
	"And what a well-preserved man he was!" remarked the aide-de-camp.And who will inherit his wealth?" he added in a whisper.
	"It von't go begging," replied the German with a smile.
	Everyone again looked toward the door, which creaked as the secondrincess went in with the drink she had prepared according toorrain's instructions. The German doctor went up to Lorrain.
	"Do you think he can last till morning?" asked the German,ddressing Lorrain in French which he pronounced badly.
	Lorrain, pursing up his lips, waved a severely negative fingerefore his nose.
	"Tonight, not later," said he in a low voice, and he moved away with decorous smile of self-satisfaction at being able clearly tonderstand and state the patient's condition.
	Meanwhile Prince Vasili had opened the door into the princess' room.
	In this room it was almost dark; only two tiny lamps were burningefore the icons and there was a pleasant scent of flowers and burntastilles. The room was crowded with small pieces of furniture,hatnots, cupboards, and little tables. The quilt of a high, whiteeather bed was just visible behind a screen. A small dog began toark.
	"Ah, is it you, cousin?"
	She rose and smoothed her hair, which was as usual so extremelymooth that it seemed to be made of one piece with her head andovered with varnish.
	"Has anything happened?" she asked. "I am so terrified."
	"No, there is no change. I only came to have a talk aboutusiness, Catiche,"* muttered the prince, seating himself wearily onhe chair she had just vacated. "You have made the place warm, Iust say," he remarked. "Well, sit down: let's have a talk."
	*Catherine.
	"I thought perhaps something had happened," she said with hernchanging stonily severe expression; and, sitting down opposite therince, she prepared to listen.
	"I wished to get a nap, mon cousin, but I can't."
	"Well, my dear?" said Prince Vasili, taking her hand and bendingt downwards as was his habit.
	It was plain that this "well?" referred to much that they bothnderstood without naming.
	The princess, who had a straight, rigid body, abnormally long forer legs, looked directly at Prince Vasili with no sign of emotionn her prominent gray eyes. Then she shook her head and glanced upt the icons with a sigh. This might have been taken as anxpression of sorrow and devotion, or of weariness and hope of restingefore long. Prince Vasili understood it as an expression ofeariness.
	"And I?" he said; "do you think it is easier for me? I am as wornut as a post horse, but still I must have a talk with you, Catiche, aery serious talk."
	Prince Vasili said no more and his cheeks began to twitch nervously,ow on one side, now on the other, giving his face an unpleasantxpression which was never to be seen on it in a drawing room. Hisyes too seemed strange; at one moment they looked impudently slynd at the next glanced round in alarm.
	The princess, holding her little dog on her lap with her thin bonyands, looked attentively into Prince Vasili's eyes evidently resolvedot to be the first to break silence, if she had to wait till morning.
	"Well, you see, my dear princess and cousin, Catherine Semenovna,"ontinued Prince Vasili, returning to his theme, apparently notithout an inner struggle; "at such a moment as this one must think ofverything. One must think of the future, of all of you... I loveou all, like children of my own, as you know."
	The princess continued to look at him without moving, and with theame dull expression.
	"And then of course my family has also to be considered," Princeasili went on, testily pushing away a little table without looking ater. "You know, Catiche, that we- you three sisters, Mamontov, andy wife- are the count's only direct heirs. I know, I know how hard its for you to talk or think of such matters. It is no easier for me;ut, my dear, I am getting on for sixty and must be prepared fornything. Do you know I have sent for Pierre? The count," pointingo his portrait, "definitely demanded that he should be called."
	Prince Vasili looked questioningly at the princess, but could notake out whether she was considering what he had just said orhether she was simply looking at him.
	"There is one thing I constantly pray God to grant, mon cousin," sheeplied, "and it is that He would be merciful to him and would allowis noble soul peacefully to leave this..."
	"Yes, yes, of course," interrupted Prince Vasili impatiently,ubbing his bald head and angrily pulling back toward him the littleable that he had pushed away. "But... in short, the fact is... younow yourself that last winter the count made a will by which heeft all his property, not to us his direct heirs, but to Pierre."
	"He has made wills enough!" quietly remarked the princess. "But heannot leave the estate to Pierre. Pierre is illegitimate."
	"But, my dear," said Prince Vasili suddenly, clutching the littleable and becoming more animated and talking more rapidly: "what if letter has been written to the Emperor in which the count asks forierre's legitimation? Do you understand that in consideration ofhe count's services, his request would be granted?..."
	The princess smiled as people do who think they know more abouthe subject under discussion than those they are talking with.
	"I can tell you more," continued Prince Vasili, seizing her hand,that letter was written, though it was not sent, and the Emperor knewf it. The only question is, has it been destroyed or not? If not,hen as soon as all is over," and Prince Vasili sighed to intimatehat he meant by the words all is over, "and the count's papers arepened, the will and letter will be delivered to the Emperor, andhe petition will certainly be granted. Pierre will get everythings the legitimate son."
	"And our share?" asked the princess smiling ironically, as ifnything might happen, only not that.
	"But, my poor Catiche, it is as clear as daylight! He will then behe legal heir to everything and you won't get anything. You mustnow, my dear, whether the will and letter were written, and whetherhey have been destroyed or not. And if they have somehow beenverlooked, you ought to know where they are, and must find them,ecause..."
	"What next?" the princess interrupted, smiling sardonically andot changing the expression of her eyes. "I am a woman, and youhink we are all stupid; but I know this: an illegitimate son cannotnherit... un batard!"* she added, as if supposing that thisranslation of the word would effectively prove to Prince Vasili thenvalidity of his contention.
	*A bastard.
	"Well, really, Catiche! Can't you understand! You are sontelligent, how is it you don't see that if the count has written aetter to the Emperor begging him to recognize Pierre as legitimate,t follows that Pierre will not be Pierre but will become Countezukhov, and will then inherit everything under the will? And ifhe will and letter are not destroyed, then you will have nothingut the consolation of having been dutiful et tout ce qui s'ensuit!*hat's certain."
	*And all that follows therefrom.
	"I know the will was made, but I also know that it is invalid; andou, mon cousin, seem to consider me a perfect fool," said therincess with the expression women assume when they suppose they areaying something witty and stinging.
	"My dear Princess Catherine Semenovna," began Prince Vasilimpatiently, "I came here not to wrangle with you, but to talk aboutour interests as with a kinswoman, a good, kind, true relation. And Iell you for the tenth time that if the letter to the Emperor andhe will in Pierre's favor are among the count's papers, then, my dearirl, you and your sisters are not heiresses! If you don't believe me,hen believe an expert. I have just been talking to Dmitri Onufrich"the family solicitor) "and he says the same."
	At this a sudden change evidently took place in the princess' ideas;er thin lips grew white, though her eyes did not change, and heroice when she began to speak passed through such transitions as sheerself evidently did not expect.
	"That would be a fine thing!" said she. "I never wanted anything and don't now."
	She pushed the little dog off her lap and smoothed her dress.
	"And this is gratitude- this is recognition for those who haveacrificed everything for his sake!" she cried. "It's splendid!ine! I don't want anything, Prince."
	"Yes, but you are not the only one. There are your sisters..."eplied Prince Vasili.
	But the princess did not listen to him.
	"Yes, I knew it long ago but had forgotten. I knew that I couldxpect nothing but meanness, deceit, envy, intrigue, andngratitude- the blackest ingratitude- in this house..."
	"Do you or do you not know where that will is?" insisted Princeasili, his cheeks twitching more than ever.
	"Yes, I was a fool! I still believed in people, loved them, andacrificed myself. But only the base, the vile succeed! I know who haseen intriguing!"
	The princees wished to rise, but the prince held her by the hand.he had the air of one who has suddenly lost faith in the wholeuman race. She gave her companion an angry glance.
	"There is still time, my dear. You must remember, Catiche, that itas all done casually in a moment of anger, of illness, and wasfterwards forgotten. Our duty, my dear, is to rectify his mistake, toase his last moments by not letting him commit this injustice, andot to let him die feeling that he is rendering unhappy those who..."
	"Who sacrificed everything for him," chimed in the princess, whoould again have risen had not the prince still held her fast, "thoughe never could appreciate it. No, mon cousin," she added with aigh, "I shall always remember that in this world one must expect noeward, that in this world there is neither honor nor justice. In thisorld one has to be cunning and cruel."
	"Now come, come! Be reasonable. I know your excellent heart."
	"No, I have a wicked heart."
	"I know your heart," repeated the prince. "I value your friendshipnd wish you to have as good an opinion of me. Don't upset yourself,nd let us talk sensibly while there is still time, be it a day ore it but an hour.... Tell me all you know about the will, and abovell where it is. You must know. We will take it at once and show it tohe count. He has, no doubt, forgotten it and will wish to destroy it.ou understand that my sole desire is conscientiously to carry out hisishes; that is my only reason for being here. I came simply to helpim and you."
	"Now I see it all! I know who has been intriguing- I know!" criedhe princess.
	"That's not the point, my dear."
	"It's that protege of yours, that sweet Princess Drubetskaya, thatnna Mikhaylovna whom I would not take for a housemaid... thenfamous, vile woman!"
	"Do not let us lose any time..."
	"Ah, don't talk to me! Last winter she wheedled herself in herend told the count such vile, disgraceful things about us,specially about Sophie- I can't repeat them- that it made the countuite ill and he would not see us for a whole fortnight. I know it washen he wrote this vile, infamous paper, but I thought the thing wasnvalid."
	"We've got to it at last- why did you not tell me about it sooner?"
	"It's in the inlaid portfolio that he keeps under his pillow,"aid the princess, ignoring his question. "Now I know! Yes; if Iave a sin, a great sin, it is hatred of that vile woman!" almosthrieked the princess, now quite changed. "And what does she comeorming herself in here for? But I will give her a piece of my mind.he time will come!"BK1|CH22
	CHAPTER XXII
	While these conversations were going on in the reception room andhe princess' room, a carriage containing Pierre (who had been sentor) and Anna Mikhaylovna (who found it necessary to accompany him)as driving into the court of Count Bezukhov's house. As the wheelsolled softly over the straw beneath the windows, Anna Mikhaylovna,aving turned with words of comfort to her companion, realized that heas asleep in his corner and woke him up. Rousing himself, Pierreollowed Anna Mikhaylovna out of the carriage, and only then begano think of the interview with his dying father which awaited him.e noticed that they had not come to the front entrance but to theack door. While he was getting down from the carriage steps twoen, who looked like tradespeople, ran hurriedly from the entrance andid in the shadow of the wall. Pausing for a moment, Pierre noticedeveral other men of the same kind hiding in the shadow of the housen both sides. But neither Anna Mikhaylovna nor the footman nor theoachman, who could not help seeing these people, took any notice ofhem. "It seems to be all right," Pierre concluded, and followednna Mikhaylovna. She hurriedly ascended the narrow dimly lit stonetaircase, calling to Pierre, who was lagging behind, to follow.hough he did not see why it was necessary for him to go to theount at all, still less why he had to go by the back stairs, yetudging by Anna Mikhaylovna's air of assurance and haste, Pierreoncluded that it was all absolutely necessary. Halfway up thetairs they were almost knocked over by some men who, carryingails, came running downstairs, their boots clattering. These menressed close to the wall to let Pierre and Anna Mikhaylovna passnd did not evince the least surprise at seeing them there.
	"Is this the way to the princesses' apartments?" asked Annaikhaylovna of one of them.
	"Yes," replied a footman in a bold loud voice, as if anything wereow permissible; "the door to the left, ma'am."
	"Perhaps the count did not ask for me," said Pierre when heeached the landing. "I'd better go to my own room."
	Anna Mikhaylovna paused and waited for him to come up.
	"Ah, my friend!" she said, touching his arm as she had done heron's when speaking to him that afternoon, "believe me I suffer noess than you do, but be a man!"
	"But really, hadn't I better go away?" he asked, looking kindly ater over his spectacles.
	"Ah, my dear friend! Forget the wrongs that may have been doneou. Think that he is your father... perhaps in the agony of death."he sighed. "I have loved you like a son from the first. Trustourself to me, Pierre. I shall not forget your interests."
	Pierre did not understand a word, but the conviction that all thisad to be grew stronger, and he meekly followed Anna Mikhaylovna whoas already opening a door.
	This door led into a back anteroom. An old man, a servant of therincesses, sat in a corner knitting a stocking. Pierre had never beenn this part of the house and did not even know of the existence ofhese rooms. Anna Mikhaylovna, addressing a maid who was hurrying pastith a decanter on a tray as "my dear" and "my sweet," asked about therincess' health and then led Pierre along a stone passage. Theirst door on the left led into the princesses' apartments. The maidith the decanter in her haste had not closed the door (everythingn the house was done in haste at that time), and Pierre and Annaikhaylovna in passing instinctively glanced into the room, whererince Vasili and the eldest princess were sitting close togetheralking. Seeing them pass, Prince Vasili drew back with obviousmpatience, while the princess jumped up and with a gesture ofesperation slammed the door with all her might.
	This action was so unlike her usual composure and the fearepicted on Prince Vasili's face so out of keeping with his dignityhat Pierre stopped and glanced inquiringly over his spectacles at hisuide. Anna Mikhaylovna evinced no surprise, she only smiled faintlynd sighed, as if to say that this was no more than she had expected.
	"Be a man, my friend. I will look after your interests," said she ineply to his look, and went still faster along the passage.
	Pierre could not make out what it was all about, and still less whatwatching over his interests" meant, but he decided that all thesehings had to be. From the passage they went into a large, dimly litoom adjoining the count's reception room. It was one of thoseumptuous but cold apartments known to Pierre only from the frontpproach, but even in this room there now stood an empty bath, andater had been spilled on the carpet. They were met by a deacon with aenser and by a servant who passed out on tiptoe without heeding them.hey went into the reception room familiar to Pierre, with two Italianindows opening into the conservatory, with its large bust and fullength portrait of Catherine the Great. The same people were stillitting here in almost the same positions as before, whispering to onenother. All became silent and turned to look at the pale tear-wornnna Mikhaylovna as she entered, and at the big stout figure of Pierreho, hanging his head, meekly followed her.
	Anna Mikhaylovna's face expressed a consciousness that theecisive moment had arrived. With the air of a practical Petersburgady she now, keeping Pierre close beside her, entered the room evenore boldly than that afternoon. She felt that as she brought with herhe person the dying man wished to see, her own admission was assured.asting a rapid glance at all those in the room and noticing theount's confessor there, she glided up to him with a sort of amble,ot exactly bowing yet seeming to grow suddenly smaller, andespectfully received the blessing first of one and then of anotherriest.
	"God be thanked that you are in time," said she to one of theriests; "all we relatives have been in such anxiety. This young mans the count's son," she added more softly. "What a terrible moment!"
	Having said this she went up to the doctor.
	"Dear doctor," said she, "this young man is the count's son. Ishere any hope?"
	The doctor cast a rapid glance upwards and silently shrugged hishoulders. Anna Mikhaylovna with just the same movement raised herhoulders and eyes, almost closing the latter, sighed, and movedway from the doctor to Pierre. To him, in a particularly respectfulnd tenderly sad voice, she said:
	"Trust in His mercy!" and pointing out a small sofa for him to sitnd wait for her, she went silently toward the door that everyoneas watching and it creaked very slightly as she disappeared behindt.
	Pierre, having made up his mind to obey his monitress implicitly,oved toward the sofa she had indicated. As soon as Anna Mikhaylovnaad disappeared he noticed that the eyes of all in the room turnedo him with something more than curiosity and sympathy. He noticedhat they whispered to one another, casting significant looks at himith a kind of awe and even servility. A deference such as he hadever before received was shown him. A strange lady, the one who hadeen talking to the priests, rose and offered him her seat; anide-de-camp picked up and returned a glove Pierre had dropped; theoctors became respectfully silent as he passed by, and moved toake way for him. At first Pierre wished to take another seat so asot to trouble the lady, and also to pick up the glove himself ando pass round the doctors who were not even in his way; but all atnce he felt that this would not do, and that tonight he was aerson obliged to perform some sort of awful rite which everyonexpected of him, and that he was therefore bound to accept theirervices. He took the glove in silence from the aide-de-camp, andat down in the lady's chair, placing his huge hands symmetricallyn his knees in the naive attitude of an Egyptian statue, andecided in his own mind that all was as it should be, and that inrder not to lose his head and do foolish things he must not act onis own ideas tonight, but must yield himself up entirely to theill of those who were guiding him.
	Not two minutes had passed before Prince Vasili with head erectajestically entered the room. He was wearing his long coat with threetars on his breast. He seemed to have grown thinner since theorning; his eyes seemed larger than usual when he glanced round andoticed Pierre. He went up to him, took his hand (a thing he neversed to do), and drew it downwards as if wishing to ascertainhether it was firmly fixed on.
	"Courage, courage, my friend! He has asked to see you. That isell!" and he turned to go.
	But Pierre thought it necessary to ask: "How is..." and hesitated,ot knowing whether it would be proper to call the dying man "theount," yet ashamed to call him "father."
	"He had another stroke about half an hour ago. Courage, myriend..."
	Pierre's mind was in such a confused state that the word "stroke"uggested to him a blow from something. He looked at Prince Vasilin perplexity, and only later grasped that a stroke was an attack ofllness. Prince Vasili said something to Lorrain in passing and wenthrough the door on tiptoe. He could not walk well on tiptoe and hishole body jerked at each step. The eldest princess followed him,nd the priests and deacons and some servants also went in at theoor. Through that door was heard a noise of things being moved about,nd at last Anna Mikhaylovna, still with the same expression, pale butesolute in the discharge of duty, ran out and touching Pierre lightlyn the arm said:
	"The divine mercy is inexhaustible! Unction is about to bedministered. Come."
	Pierre went in at the door, stepping on the soft carpet, and noticedhat the strange lady, the aide-de-camp, and some of the servants, allollowed him in, as if there were now no further need for permissiono enter that room.BK1|CH23
	CHAPTER XXIII
	Pierre well knew this large room divided by columns and an arch, itsalls hung round with Persian carpets. The part of the room behind theolumns, with a high silk-curtained mahogany bedstead on one sidend on the other an immense case containing icons, was brightlylluminated with red light like a Russian church during eveningervice. Under the gleaming icons stood a long invalid chair, and inhat chair on snowy-white smooth pillows, evidently freshly changed,ierre saw- covered to the waist by a bright green quilt- theamiliar, majestic figure of his father, Count Bezukhov, with thatray mane of hair above his broad forehead which reminded one of aion, and the deep characteristically noble wrinkles of hisandsome, ruddy face. He lay just under the icons; his large thickands outside the quilt. Into the right hand, which was lying palmownwards, a wax taper had been thrust between forefinger and thumb,nd an old servant, bending over from behind the chair, held it inosition. By the chair stood the priests, their long hair falling overheir magnificent glittering vestments, with lighted tapers in theirands, slowly and solemnly conducting the service. A little behindhem stood the two younger princesses holding handkerchiefs to theiryes, and just in front of them their eldest sister, Catiche, with aicious and determined look steadily fixed on the icons, as thougheclaring to all that she could not answer for herself should shelance round. Anna Mikhaylovna, with a meek, sorrowful, andll-forgiving expression on her face, stood by the door near thetrange lady. Prince Vasili in front of the door, near the invalidhair, a wax taper in his left hand, was leaning his left arm on thearved back of a velvet chair he had turned round for the purpose, andas crossing himself with his right hand, turning his eyes upward eachime he touched his forehead. His face wore a calm look of piety andesignation to the will of God. "If you do not understand theseentiments," he seemed to be saying, "so much the worse for you!"
	Behind him stood the aide-de-camp, the doctors, and the menservants;he men and women had separated as in church. All were silentlyrossing themselves, and the reading of the church service, theubdued chanting of deep bass voices, and in the intervals sighs andhe shuffling of feet were the only sounds that could be heard. Annaikhaylovna, with an air of importance that showed that she felt sheuite knew what she was about, went across the room to where Pierreas standing and gave him a taper. He lit it and, distracted bybserving those around him, began crossing himself with the handhat held the taper.
	Sophie, the rosy, laughter-loving, youngest princess with theole, watched him. She smiled, hid her face in her handkerchief, andemained with it hidden for awhile; then looking up and seeingierre she again began to laugh. She evidently felt unable to lookt him without laughing, but could not resist looking at him: so to beut of temptation she slipped quietly behind one of the columns. Inhe midst of the service the voices of the priests suddenly ceased,hey whispered to one another, and the old servant who was holding theount's hand got up and said something to the ladies. Anna Mikhaylovnatepped forward and, stooping over the dying man, beckoned toorrain from behind her back. The French doctor held no taper; heas leaning against one of the columns in a respectful attitudemplying that he, a foreigner, in spite of all differences of faith,nderstood the full importance of the rite now being performed andven approved of it. He now approached the sick man with the noiselesstep of one in full vigor of life, with his delicate white fingersaised from the green quilt the hand that was free, and turningideways felt the pulse and reflected a moment. The sick man was givenomething to drink, there was a stir around him, then the peopleesumed their places and the service continued. During this intervalierre noticed that Prince Vasili left the chair on which he hadeen leaning, and- with air which intimated that he knew what he wasbout and if others did not understand him it was so much the worseor them- did not go up to the dying man, but passed by him, joinedhe eldest princess, and moved with her to the side of the roomhere stood the high bedstead with its silken hangings. On leaving theed both Prince Vasili and the princess passed out by a back door, buteturned to their places one after the other before the service wasoncluded. Pierre paid no more attention to this occurrence than tohe rest of what went on, having made up his mind once for all thathat he saw happening around him that evening was in some wayssential.
	The chanting of the service ceased, and the voice of the priestas heard respectfully congratulating the dying man on having receivedhe sacrament. The dying man lay as lifeless and immovable asefore. Around him everyone began to stir: steps were audible andhispers, among which Anna Mikhaylovna's was the most distinct.
	Pierre heard her say:
	"Certainly he must be moved onto the bed; here it will bempossible..."
	The sick man was so surrounded by doctors, princesses, andervants that Pierre could no longer see the reddish-yellow faceith its gray mane- which, though he saw other faces as well, he hadot lost sight of for a single moment during the whole service. Heudged by the cautious movements of those who crowded round thenvalid chair that they had lifted the dying man and were moving him.
	"Catch hold of my arm or you'll drop him!" he heard one of theervants say in a frightened whisper. "Catch hold from underneath.ere!" exclaimed different voices; and the heavy breathing of theearers and the shuffling of their feet grew more hurried, as if theeight they were carrying were too much for them.
	As the bearers, among whom was Anna Mikhaylovna, passed the youngan he caught a momentary glimpse between their heads and backs of theying man's high, stout, uncovered chest and powerful shoulders,aised by those who were holding him under the armpits, and of hisray, curly, leonine head. This head, with its remarkably broad brownd cheekbones, its handsome, sensual mouth, and its cold, majesticxpression, was not disfigured by the approach of death. It was theame as Pierre remembered it three months before, when the count hadent him to Petersburg. But now this head was swaying helplesslyith the uneven movements of the bearers, and the cold listless gazeixed itself upon nothing.
	After a few minutes' bustle beside the high bedstead, those whoad carried the sick man dispersed. Anna Mikhaylovna touchedierre's hand and said, "Come." Pierre went with her to the bed onhich the sick man had been laid in a stately pose in keeping with theeremony just completed. He lay with his head propped high on theillows. His hands were symmetrically placed on the green silkuilt, the palms downward. When Pierre came up the count was gazingtraight at him, but with a look the significance of which could note understood by mortal man. Either this look meant nothing but thats long as one has eyes they must look somewhere, or it meant toouch. Pierre hesitated, not knowing what to do, and glancednquiringly at his guide. Anna Mikhaylovna made a hurried sign wither eyes, glancing at the sick man's hand and moving her lips as if toend it a kiss. Pierre, carefully stretching his neck so as not toouch the quilt, followed her suggestion and pressed his lips to thearge boned, fleshy hand. Neither the hand nor a single muscle ofhe count's face stirred. Once more Pierre looked questioningly atnna Mikhaylovna to see what he was to do next. Anna Mikhaylovnaith her eyes indicated a chair that stood beside the bed. Pierrebediently sat down, his eyes asking if he were doing right. Annaikhaylovna nodded approvingly. Again Pierre fell into the naivelyymmetrical pose of an Egyptian statue, evidently distressed thatis stout and clumsy body took up so much room and doing his utmost toook as small as possible. He looked at the count, who still gazedt the spot where Pierre's face had been before he sat down. Annaikhaylovna indicated by her attitude her consciousness of theathetic importance of these last moments of meeting between theather and son. This lasted about two minutes, which to Pierreeemed an hour. Suddenly the broad muscles and lines of the count'sace began to twitch. The twitching increased, the handsome mouthas drawn to one side (only now did Pierre realize how near deathis father was), and from that distorted mouth issued an indistinct,oarse sound. Anna Mikhaylovna looked attentively at the sick man'syes, trying to guess what he wanted; she pointed first to Pierre,hen to some drink, then named Prince Vasili in an inquiringhisper, then pointed to the quilt. The eyes and face of the sickan showed impatience. He made an effort to look at the servant whotood constantly at the head of the bed.
	"Wants to turn on the other side," whispered the servant, and got upo turn the count's heavy body toward the wall.
	Pierre rose to help him.
	While the count was being turned over, one of his arms fell backelplessly and he made a fruitless effort to pull it forward.hether he noticed the look of terror with which Pierre regardedhat lifeless arm, or whether some other thought flitted across hisying brain, at any rate he glanced at the refractory arm, at Pierre'serror-stricken face, and again at the arm, and on his face aeeble, piteous smile appeared, quite out of keeping with hiseatures, that seemed to deride his own helplessness. At sight of thismile Pierre felt an unexpected quivering in his breast and a ticklingn his nose, and tears dimmed his eyes. The sick man was turned ono his side with his face to the wall. He sighed.
	"He is dozing," said Anna Mikhaylovna, observing that one of therincesses was coming to take her turn at watching. "Let us go."
	Pierre went out.BK1|CH24
	CHAPTER XXIV
	There was now no one in the reception room except Prince Vasilind the eldest princess, who were sitting under the portrait ofatherine the Great and talking eagerly. As soon as they saw Pierrend his companion they became silent, and Pierre thought he saw therincess hide something as she whispered:
	"I can't bear the sight of that woman."
	"Catiche has had tea served in the small drawing room," saidrince Vasili to Anna Mikhaylovna. "Go and take something, my poornna Mikhaylovna, or you will not hold out."
	To Pierre he said nothing, merely giving his arm a sympatheticqueeze below the shoulder. Pierre went with Anna Mikhaylovna into themall drawing room.
	"There is nothing so refreshing after a sleepless night as a cupf this delicious Russian tea," Lorrain was saying with an air ofestrained animation as he stood sipping tea from a delicate Chineseandleless cup before a table on which tea and a cold supper were laidn the small circular room. Around the table all who were at Countezukhov's house that night had gathered to fortify themselves. Pierreell remembered this small circular drawing room with its mirrorsnd little tables. During balls given at the house Pierre, who did notnow how to dance, had liked sitting in this room to watch theadies who, as they passed through in their ball dresses with diamondsnd pearls on their bare shoulders, looked at themselves in therilliantly lighted mirrors which repeated their reflections severalimes. Now this same room was dimly lighted by two candles. On onemall table tea things and supper dishes stood in disorder, and in theiddle of the night a motley throng of people sat there, noterrymaking, but somberly whispering, and betraying by every wordnd movement that they none of them forgot what was happening and whatas about to happen in the bedroom. Pierre did not eat anything thoughe would very much have liked to. He looked inquiringly at hisonitress and saw that she was again going on tiptoe to theeception room where they had left Prince Vasili and the eldestrincess. Pierre concluded that this also was essential, and after ahort interval followed her. Anna Mikhaylovna was standing besidehe princess, and they were both speaking in excited whispers.
	"Permit me, Princess, to know what is necessary and what is notecessary," said the younger of the two speakers, evidently in theame state of excitement as when she had slammed the door of her room.
	"But, my dear princess," answered Anna Mikhaylovna blandly butmpressively, blocking the way to the bedroom and preventing the otherrom passing, "won't this be too much for poor Uncle at a momenthen he needs repose? Worldly conversation at a moment when his souls already prepared..."
	Prince Vasili was seated in an easy chair in his familiarttitude, with one leg crossed high above the other. His cheeks, whichere so flabby that they looked heavier below, were twitchingiolently; but he wore the air of a man little concerned in what thewo ladies were saying.
	"Come, my dear Anna Mikhaylovna, let Catiche do as she pleases.ou know how fond the count is of her."
	"I don't even know what is in this paper," said the younger of thewo ladies, addressing Prince Vasili and pointing to an inlaidortfolio she held in her hand. "All I know is that his real will isn his writing table, and this is a paper he has forgotten...."
	She tried to pass Anna Mikhaylovna, but the latter sprang so as toar her path.
	"I know, my dear, kind princess," said Anna Mikhaylovna, seizing theortfolio so firmly that it was plain she would not let go easily.Dear princess, I beg and implore you, have some pity on him! Jeous en conjure..."
	The princess did not reply. Their efforts in the struggle for theortfolio were the only sounds audible, but it was evident that if therincess did speak, her words would not be flattering to Annaikhaylovna. Though the latter held on tenaciously, her voice lostone of its honeyed firmness and softness.
	"Pierre, my dear, come here. I think he will not be out of placen a family consultation; is it not so, Prince?"
	"Why don't you speak, cousin?" suddenly shrieked the princess sooud that those in the drawing room heard her and were startled.Why do you remain silent when heaven knows who permits herself tonterfere, making a scene on the very threshold of a dying man's room?ntriguer!" she hissed viciously, and tugged with all her might at theortfolio.
	But Anna Mikhaylovna went forward a step or two to keep her holdn the portfolio, and changed her grip.
	Prince Vasili rose. "Oh!" said he with reproach and surprise,this is absurd! Come, let go I tell you."
	The princess let go.
	"And you too!"
	But Anna Mikhaylovna did not obey him.
	"Let go, I tell you! I will take the responsibility. I myself willo and ask him, I!... does that satisfy you?"
	"But, Prince," said Anna Mikhaylovna, "after such a solemnacrament, allow him a moment's peace! Here, Pierre, tell them yourpinion," said she, turning to the young man who, having come quitelose, was gazing with astonishment at the angry face of therincess which had lost all dignity, and at the twitching cheeks ofrince Vasili.
	"Remember that you will answer for the consequences," said Princeasili severely. "You don't know what you are doing."
	"Vile woman!" shouted the princess, darting unexpectedly at Annaikhaylovna and snatching the portfolio from her.
	Prince Vasili bent his head and spread out his hands.
	At this moment that terrible door, which Pierre had watched soong and which had always opened so quietly, burst noisily open andanged against the wall, and the second of the three sisters rushedut wringing her hands.
	"What are you doing!" she cried vehemently. "He is dying and youeave me alone with him!"
	Her sister dropped the portfolio. Anna Mikhaylovna, stooping,uickly caught up the object of contention and ran into the bedroom.he eldest princess and Prince Vasili, recovering themselves, followeder. A few minutes later the eldest sister came out with a pale hardace, again biting her underlip. At sight of Pierre her expressionhowed an irrepressible hatred.
	"Yes, now you may be glad!" said she; "this is what you have beenaiting for." And bursting into tears she hid her face in herandkerchief and rushed from the room.
	Prince Vasili came next. He staggered to the sofa on which Pierreas sitting and dropped onto it, covering his face with his hand.ierre noticed that he was pale and that his jaw quivered and shook asf in an ague.
	"Ah, my friend!" said he, taking Pierre by the elbow; and thereas in his voice a sincerity and weakness Pierre had never observed int before. "How often we sin, how much we deceive, and all for what? Im near sixty, dear friend... I too... All will end in death, all!eath is awful..." and he burst into tears.
	Anna Mikhaylovna came out last. She approached Pierre with slow,uiet steps.
	"Pierre!" she said.
	Pierre gave her an inquiring look. She kissed the young man on hisorehead, wetting him with her tears. Then after a pause she said:
	"He is no more...."
	Pierre looked at her over his spectacles.
	"Come, I will go with you. Try to weep, nothing gives such relief asears."
	She led him into the dark drawing room and Pierre was glad no oneould see his face. Anna Mikhaylovna left him, and when she returnede was fast asleep with his head on his arm.
	In the morning Anna Mikhaylovna said to Pierre:
	"Yes, my dear, this is a great loss for us all, not to speak of you.ut God will support you: you are young, and are now, I hope, inommand of an immense fortune. The will has not yet been opened. Inow you well enough to be sure that this will not turn your head, butt imposes duties on you, and you must be a man."
	Pierre was silent.
	"Perhaps later on I may tell you, my dear boy, that if I had noteen there, God only knows what would have happened! You know, Uncleromised me only the day before yesterday not to forget Boris. Bute had no time. I hope, my dear friend, you will carry out yourather's wish?"
	Pierre understood nothing of all this and coloring shyly looked inilence at Princess Anna Mikhaylovna. After her talk with Pierre, Annaikhaylovna returned to the Rostovs' and went to bed. On waking in theorning she told the Rostovs and all her acquaintances the detailsf Count Bezukhov's death. She said the count had died as she woulderself wish to die, that his end was not only touching butdifying. As to the last meeting between father and son, it was soouching that she could not think of it without tears, and did notnow which had behaved better during those awful moments- the fatherho so remembered everything and everybody at last and last and hadpoken such pathetic words to the son, or Pierre, whom it had beenitiful to see, so stricken was he with grief, though he tried hard toide it in order not to sadden his dying father. "It is painful, butt does one good. It uplifts the soul to see such men as the old countnd his worthy son," said she. Of the behavior of the eldestrincess and Prince Vasili she spoke disapprovingly, but in whispersnd as a great secret.BK1|CH25
	CHAPTER XXV
	At Bald Hills, Prince Nicholas Andreevich Bolkonski's estate, therrival of young Prince Andrew and his wife was daily expected, buthis expectation did not upset the regular routine of life in theld prince's household. General in Chief Prince Nicholas Andreevichnicknamed in society, "the King of Prussia") ever since the Emperoraul had exiled him to his country estate had lived there continuouslyith his daughter, Princess Mary, and her companion, Mademoiselleourienne. Though in the new reign he was free to return to theapitals, he still continued to live in the country, remarking thatnyone who wanted to see him could come the hundred miles fromoscow to Bald Hills, while he himself needed no one and nothing. Hesed to say that there are only two sources of human vice- idlenessnd superstition, and only two virtues- activity and intelligence.e himself undertook his daughter's education, and to develop thesewo cardinal virtues in her gave her lessons in algebra and geometryill she was twenty, and arranged her life so that her whole timeas occupied. He was himself always occupied: writing his memoirs,olving problems in higher mathematics, turning snuffboxes on a lathe,orking in the garden, or superintending the building that waslways going on at his estate. As regularity is a prime conditionacilitating activity, regularity in his household was carried tohe highest point of exactitude. He always came to table underrecisely the same conditions, and not only at the same hour but athe same minute. With those about him, from his daughter to his serfs,he prince was sharp and invariably exacting, so that without being hardhearted man he inspired such fear and respect as few hardhearteden would have aroused. Although he was in retirement and had now nonfluence in political affairs, every high official appointed to therovince in which the prince's estate lay considered it his duty toisit him and waited in the lofty antechamber ante chamber just as therchitect, gardener, or Princess Mary did, till the prince appearedunctually to the appointed hour. Everyone sitting in this antechamberxperienced the same feeling of respect and even fear when thenormously high study door opened and showed the figure of a rathermall old man, with powdered wig, small withered hands, and bushy grayyebrows which, when he frowned, sometimes hid the gleam of hishrewd, youthfully glittering eyes.
	On the morning of the day that the young couple were to arrive,rincess Mary entered the antechamber as usual at the time appointedor the morning greeting, crossing herself with trepidation andepeating a silent prayer. Every morning she came in like that, andvery morning prayed that the daily interview might pass off well.
	An old powdered manservant who was sitting in the antechamber roseuietly and said in a whisper: "Please walk in."
	Through the door came the regular hum of a lathe. The princessimidly opened the door which moved noiselessly and easily. She pausedt the entrance. The prince was working at the lathe and afterlancing round continued his work.
	The enormous study was full of things evidently in constant use. Thearge table covered with books and plans, the tall glass-frontedookcases with keys in the locks, the high desk for writing whiletanding up, on which lay an open exercise book, and the lathe withools laid ready to hand and shavings scattered around- allndicated continuous, varied, and orderly activity. The motion ofhe small foot shod in a Tartar boot embroidered with silver, andhe firm pressure of the lean sinewy hand, showed that the princetill possessed the tenacious endurance and vigor of hardy old age.fter a few more turns of the lathe he removed his foot from theedal, wiped his chisel, dropped it into a leather pouch attached tohe lathe, and, approaching the table, summoned his daughter. He neverave his children a blessing, so he simply held out his bristlyheek (as yet unshaven) and, regarding her tenderly and attentively,aid severely:
	"Quite well? All right then, sit down." He took the exercise bookontaining lessons in geometry written by himself and drew up ahair with his foot.
	"For tomorrow!" said he, quickly finding the page and making acratch from one paragraph to another with his hard nail.
	The princess bent over the exercise book on the table.
	"Wait a bit, here's a letter for you," said the old man suddenly,aking a letter addressed in a woman's hand from a bag hanging abovehe table, onto which he threw it.
	At the sight of the letter red patches showed themselves on therincess' face. She took it quickly and bent her head over it.
	"From Heloise?" asked the prince with a cold smile that showed histill sound, yellowish teeth.
	"Yes, it's from Julie," replied the princess with a timid glance and timid smile.
	"I'll let two more letters pass, but the third I'll read," saidhe prince sternly; "I'm afraid you write much nonsense. I'll read thehird!"
	"Read this if you like, Father," said the princess, blushing stillore and holding out the letter.
	"The third, I said the third!" cried the prince abruptly, pushinghe letter away, and leaning his elbows on the table he drew towardim the exercise book containing geometrical figures.
	"Well, madam," he began, stooping over the book close to hisaughter and placing an arm on the back of the chair on which she sat,o that she felt herself surrounded on all sides by the acrid scent ofld age and tobacco, which she had known so long. "Now, madam, theseriangles are equal; please note that the angle ABC..."
	The princess looked in a scared way at her father's eyeslittering close to her; the red patches on her face came and went,nd it was plain that she understood nothing and was so frightenedhat her fear would prevent her understanding any of her father'surther explanations, however clear they might be. Whether it washe teacher's fault or the pupil's, this same thing happened everyay: the princess' eyes grew dim, she could not see and could not hearnything, but was only conscious of her stern father's withered facelose to her, of his breath and the smell of him, and could think onlyf how to get away quickly to her own room to make out the problemn peace. The old man was beside himself: moved the chair on whiche was sitting noisily backward and forward, made efforts to controlimself and not become vehement, but almost always did becomeehement, scolded, and sometimes flung the exercise book away.
	The princess gave a wrong answer.
	"Well now, isn't she a fool!" shouted the prince, pushing the bookside and turning sharply away; but rising immediately, he paced upnd down, lightly touched his daughter's hair and sat down again.
	He drew up his chair. and continued to explain.
	"This won't do, Princess; it won't do," said he, when Princess Mary,aving taken and closed the exercise book with the next day'sesson, was about to leave: "Mathematics are most important, madam! don't want to have you like our silly ladies. Get used to it andou'll like it," and he patted her cheek. "It will drive all theonsense out of your head."
	She turned to go, but he stopped her with a gesture and took anncut book from the high desk.
	"Here is some sort of Key to the Mysteries that your Heloise hasent you. Religious! I don't interfere with anyone's belief... Iave looked at it. Take it. Well, now go. Go."
	He patted her on the shoulder and himself closed the door after her.
	Princess Mary went back to her room with the sad, scaredxpression that rarely left her and which made her plain, sicklyace yet plainer. She sat down at her writing table, on which stoodiniature portraits and which was littered with books and papers.he princess was as untidy as her father was tidy. She put down theeometry book and eagerly broke the seal of her letter. It was fromer most intimate friend from childhood; that same Julie Karaginaho had been at the Rostovs' name-day party.
	Julie wrote in French:
	Dear and precious Friend, How terrible and frightful a thing iseparation! Though I tell myself that half my life and half myappiness are wrapped up in you, and that in spite of the distanceeparating us our hearts are united by indissoluble bonds, my heartebels against fate and in spite of the pleasures and distractionsround me I cannot overcome a certain secret sorrow that has been iny heart ever since we parted. Why are we not together as we were lastummer, in your big study, on the blue sofa, the confidential sofa?hy cannot I now, as three months ago, draw fresh moral strengthrom your look, so gentle, calm, and penetrating, a look I loved soell and seem to see before me as I write?
	Having read thus far, Princess Mary sighed and glanced into theirror which stood on her right. It reflected a weak, ungracefuligure and thin face. Her eyes, always sad, now looked with particularopelessness at her reflection in the glass. "She flatters me,"hought the princess, turning away and continuing to read. But Julieid not flatter her friend, the princess' eyes- large, deep anduminous (it seemed as if at times there radiated from them shaftsf warm light)- were so beautiful that very often in spite of thelainness of her face they gave her an attraction more powerful thanhat of beauty. But the princess never saw the beautiful expression ofer own eyes- the look they had when she was not thinking oferself. As with everyone, her face assumed a forced unnaturalxpression as soon as she looked in a glass. She went on reading:
	All Moscow talks of nothing but war. One of my two brothers islready abroad, the other is with the Guards, who are starting onheir march to the frontier. Our dear Emperor has left Petersburgnd it is thought intends to expose his precious person to the chancesf war. God grant that the Corsican monster who is destroying theeace of Europe may be overthrown by the angel whom it has pleased thelmighty, in His goodness, to give us as sovereign! To say nothingf my brothers, this war has deprived me of one of the associationsearest my heart. I mean young Nicholas Rostov, who with hisnthusiasm could not bear to remain inactive and has left theniversity to join the army. I will confess to you, dear Mary, that inpite of his extreme youth his departure for the army was a greatrief to me. This young man, of whom I spoke to you last summer, is sooble-minded and full of that real youthfulness which one seldom findsowadays among our old men of twenty and, particularly, he is so franknd has so much heart. He is so pure and poetic that my relations withim, transient as they were, have been one of the sweetest comforts toy poor heart, which has already suffered so much. Someday I will tellou about our parting and all that was said then. That is still tooresh. Ah, dear friend, you are happy not to know these poignantoys and sorrows. You are fortunate, for the latter are generallyhe stronger! I know very well that Count Nicholas is too young evero be more to me than a friend, but this sweet friendship, this poeticnd pure intimacy, were what my heart needed. But enough of this!he chief news, about which all Moscow gossips, is the death of oldount Bezukhov, and his inheritance. Fancy! The three princessesave received very little, Prince Vasili nothing, and it is Monsieurierre who has inherited all the property and has besides beenecognized as legitimate; so that he is now Count Bezukhov andossessor of the finest fortune in Russia. It is rumored that Princeasili played a very despicable part in this affair and that heeturned to Petersburg quite crestfallen.
	I confess I understand very little about all these matters ofills and inheritance; but I do know that since this young man, whome all used to know as plain Monsieur Pierre, has become Countezukhov and the owner of one of the largest fortunes in Russia, Im much amused to watch the change in the tone and manners of theammas burdened by marriageable daughters, and of the young ladieshemselves, toward him, though, between you and me, he always seemedo me a poor sort of fellow. As for the past two years people havemused themselves by finding husbands for me (most of whom I don'tven know), the matchmaking chronicles of Moscow now speak of me ashe future Countess Bezukhova. But you will understand that I haveo desire for the post. A propos of marriages: do you know that ahile ago that universal auntie Anna Mikhaylovna told me, under theeal of strict secrecy, of a plan of marriage for you. It is neitherore nor less than with Prince Vasili's son Anatole, whom they wish toeform by marrying him to someone rich and distinguee, and it is onou that his relations' choice has fallen. I don't know what youill think of it, but I consider it my duty to let you know of it.e is said to be very handsome and a terrible scapegrace. That isll I have been able to find out about him.
	But enough of gossip. I am at the end of my second sheet of paper,nd Mamma has sent for me to go and dine at the Apraksins'. Read theystical book I am sending you; it has an enormous success here.hough there are things in it difficult for the feeble human mind torasp, it is an admirable book which calms and elevates the soul.dieu! Give my respects to monsieur your father and my complimentso Mademoiselle Bourienne. I embrace you as I love you.
	                                                 JULIE
	P.S. Let me have news of your brother and his charming little wife.
	The princess pondered awhile with a thoughtful smile and heruminous eyes lit up so that her face was entirely transformed. Thenhe suddenly rose and with her heavy tread went up to the table. Sheook a sheet of paper and her hand moved rapidly over it. This ishe reply she wrote, also in French:
	Dear and precious Friend, Your letter of the 13th has given me greatelight. So you still love me, my romantic Julie? Separation, of whichou say so much that is bad, does not seem to have had its usualffect on you. You complain of our separation. What then should I say,f I dared complain, I who am deprived of all who are dear to me?h, if we had not religion to console us life would be very sad. Whyo you suppose that I should look severely on your affection forhat young man? On such matters I am only severe with myself. Inderstand such feelings in others, and if never having felt them Iannot approve of them, neither do I condemn them. Only it seems to mehat Christian love, love of one's neighbor, love of one's enemy, isorthier, sweeter, and better than the feelings which the beautifulyes of a young man can inspire in a romantic and loving young girlike yourself.
	The news of Count Bezukhov's death reached us before your letter andy father was much affected by it. He says the count was the lastepresentative but one of the great century, and that it is his ownurn now, but that he will do all he can to let his turn come asate as possible. God preserve us from that terrible misfortune!
	I cannot agree with you about Pierre, whom I knew as a child. Helways seemed to me to have an excellent heart, and that is theuality I value most in people. As to his inheritance and the partlayed by Prince Vasili, it is very sad for both. Ah, my dearriend, our divine Saviour's words, that it is easier for a camel too through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter theingdom of God, are terribly true. I pity Prince Vasili but am stillore sorry for Pierre. So young, and burdened with such riches- tohat temptations he will be exposed! If I were asked what I desireost on earth, it would be to be poorer than the poorest beggar. Ahousand thanks, dear friend, for the volume you have sent me andhich has such success in Moscow. Yet since you tell me that amongome good things it contains others which our weak human understandingannot grasp, it seems to me rather useless to spend time in readinghat is unintelligible and can therefore bear no fruit. I neverould understand the fondness some people have for confusing theirinds by dwelling on mystical books that merely awaken their doubtsnd excite their imagination, giving them a bent for exaggerationuite contrary to Christian simplicity. Let us rather read thepistles and Gospels. Let us not seek to penetrate what mysteries theyontain; for how can we, miserable sinners that we are, know theerrible and holy secrets of Providence while we remain in thislesh which forms an impenetrable veil between us and the Eternal? Lets rather confine ourselves to studying those sublime rules whichur divine Saviour has left for our guidance here below. Let us try toonform to them and follow them, and let us be persuaded that the lesse let our feeble human minds roam, the better we shall please God,ho rejects all knowledge that does not come from Him; and the less weeek to fathom what He has been pleased to conceal from us, the soonerill He vouchsafe its revelation to us through His divine Spirit.
	My father has not spoken to me of a suitor, but has only told mehat he has received a letter and is expecting a visit from Princeasili. In regard to this project of marriage for me, I will tell you,ear sweet friend, that I look on marriage as a divine institutiono which we must conform. However painful it may be to me, shouldhe Almighty lay the duties of wife and wife and mother upon me Ihall try to perform them as faithfully as I can, withoutisquieting myself by examining my feelings toward him whom He mayive me for husband.
	I have had a letter from my brother, who announces his speedyrrival at Bald Hills with his wife. This pleasure will be but a briefne, however, for he will leave, us again to take part in this unhappyar into which we have been drawn, God knows how or why. Not onlyhere you are- at the heart of affairs and of the world- is the talkll of war, even here amid fieldwork and the calm of nature- whichownsfolk consider characteristic of the country- rumors of war areeard and painfully felt. My father talks of nothing but marches andountermarches, things of which I understand nothing; and the dayefore yesterday during my daily walk through the village Iitnessed a heartrending scene.... It was a convoy of conscriptsnrolled from our people and starting to join the army. You shouldave seen the state of the mothers, wives, and children of the men whoere going and should have heard the sobs. It seems as thoughankind has forgotten the laws of its divine Saviour, Who preachedove and forgiveness of injuries- and that men attribute thereatest merit to skill in killing one another.
	Adieu, dear and kind friend; may our divine Saviour and His mostoly Mother keep you in their holy and all-powerful care!
	                                                    MARY
	"Ah, you are sending off a letter, Princess? I have alreadyispatched mine. I have written to my poor mother," said the smilingademoiselle Bourienne rapidly, in her pleasant mellow tones andith guttural r's. She brought into Princess Mary's strenuous,ournful, and gloomy world a quite different atmosphere, careless,ighthearted, and self-satisfied.
	"Princess, I must warn you," she added, lowering her voice andvidently listening to herself with pleasure, and speaking withxaggerated grasseyement, "the prince has been scolding Michaelvanovich. He is in a very bad humor, very morose. Be prepared."
	"Ah, dear friend," replied Princess Mary, "I have asked you never toarn me of the humor my father is in. I do not allow myself to judgeim and would not have others do so."
	The princess glanced at her watch and, seeing that she was fiveinutes late in starting her practice on the clavichord, went into theitting room with a look of alarm. Between twelve and two o'clock,s the day was mapped out, the prince rested and the princess playedhe clavichord.BK1|CH26
	CHAPTER XXVI
	The gray-haired valet was sitting drowsily listening to thenoring of the prince, who was in his large study. From the far sidef the house through the closed doors came the sound of difficultassages- twenty times repeated- of a sonata by Dussek.
	Just then a closed carriage and another with a hood drove up tohe porch. Prince Andrew got out of the carriage, helped his littleife to alight, and let her pass into the house before him. Oldikhon, wearing a wig, put his head out of the door of thentechamber, reported in a whisper that the prince was sleeping, andastily closed the door. Tikhon knew that neither the son's arrivalor any other unusual event must be allowed to disturb the appointedrder of the day. Prince Andrew apparently knew this as well asikhon; he looked at his watch as if to ascertain whether his father'sabits had changed since he was at home last, and, having assuredimself that they had not, he turned to his wife.
	"He will get up in twenty minutes. Let us go across to Mary's room,"e said.
	The little princess had grown stouter during this time, but her eyesnd her short, downy, smiling lip lifted when she began to speakust as merrily and prettily as ever.
	"Why, this is a palace!" she said to her husband, looking aroundith the expression with which people compliment their host at a ball.Let's come, quick, quick!" And with a glance round, she smiled atikhon, at her husband, and at the footman who accompanied them.
	"Is that Mary practicing? Let's go quietly and take her byurprise."
	Prince Andrew followed her with a courteous but sad expression.
	"You've grown older, Tikhon," he said in passing to the old man, whoissed his hand.
	Before they reached the room from which the sounds of the clavichordame, the pretty, fair haired Frenchwoman, Mademoiselle Bourienne,ushed out apparently beside herself with delight.
	"Ah! what joy for the princess!" exclaimed she: "At last! I must leter know."
	"No, no, please not... You are Mademoiselle Bourienne," said theittle princess, kissing her. "I know you already through myister-in-law's friendship for you. She was not expecting us?"
	They went up to the door of the sitting room from which came theound of the oft-repeated passage of the sonata. Prince Andrew stoppednd made a grimace, as if expecting something unpleasant.
	The little princess entered the room. The passage broke off in theiddle, a cry was heard, then Princess Mary's heavy tread and theound of kissing. When Prince Andrew went in the two princesses, whoad only met once before for a short time at his wedding, were in eachther's arms warmly pressing their lips to whatever place theyappened to touch. Mademoiselle Bourienne stood near them pressing herand to her heart, with a beatific smile and obviously equally readyo cry or to laugh. Prince Andrew shrugged his shoulders androwned, as lovers of music do when they hear a false note. The twoomen let go of one another, and then, as if afraid of being too late,eized each other's hands, kissing them and pulling them away, andgain began kissing each other on the face, and then to Princendrew's surprise both began to cry and kissed again. Mademoiselleourienne also began to cry. Prince Andrew evidently felt ill at ease,ut to the two women it seemed quite natural that they should cry, andpparently it never entered their heads that it could have beentherwise at this meeting.
	"Ah! my dear!... Ah! Mary!" they suddenly exclaimed, and thenaughed. "I dreamed last night..."- "You were not expecting us?..."-Ah! Mary, you have got thinner?..." "And you have grown stouter!..."
	"I knew the princess at once," put in Mademoiselle Bourienne.
	"And I had no idea!..." exclaimed Princess Mary. "Ah, Andrew, Iid not see you."
	Prince Andrew and his sister, hand in hand, kissed one another,nd he told her she was still the same crybaby as ever. Princessary had turned toward her brother, and through her tears theoving, warm, gentle look of her large luminous eyes, very beautifult that moment, rested on Prince Andrew's face.
	The little princess talked incessantly, her short, downy upper lipontinually and rapidly touching her rosy nether lip when necessarynd drawing up again next moment when her face broke into a smile oflittering teeth and sparkling eyes. She told of an accident theyad had on the Spasski Hill which might have been serious for her iner condition, and immediately after that informed them that she hadeft all her clothes in Petersburg and that heaven knew what she wouldave to dress in here; and that Andrew had quite changed, and thatitty Odyntsova had married an old man, and that there was a suitoror Mary, a real one, but that they would talk of that later. Princessary was still looking silently at her brother and her beautifulyes were full of love and sadness. It was plain that she wasollowing a train of thought independent of her sister-in-law's words.n the midst of a description of the last Petersburg fete sheddressed her brother:
	"So you are really going to the war, Andrew?" she said sighing.
	Lise sighed too.
	"Yes, and even tomorrow," replied her brother.
	"He is leaving me here, God knows why, when he might have hadromotion..."
	Princess Mary did not listen to the end, but continuing her train ofhought turned to her sister-in-law with a tender glance at herigure.
	"Is it certain?" she said.
	The face of the little princess changed. She sighed and said:Yes, quite certain. Ah! it is very dreadful..."
	Her lip descended. She brought her face close to her sister-in-law'snd unexpectedly again began to cry.
	"She needs rest," said Prince Andrew with a frown. "Don't you, Lise?ake her to your room and I'll go to Father. How is he? Just theame?"
	"Yes, just the same. Though I don't know what your opinion will be,"nswered the princess joyfully.
	"And are the hours the same? And the walks in the avenues? And theathe?" asked Prince Andrew with a scarcely perceptible smile whichhowed that, in spite of all his love and respect for his father, heas aware of his weaknesses.
	"The hours are the same, and the lathe, and also the mathematics andy geometry lessons," said Princess Mary gleefully, as if heressons in geometry were among the greatest delights of her life.
	When the twenty minutes had elapsed and the time had come for theld prince to get up, Tikhon came to call the young prince to hisather. The old man made a departure from his usual routine in honorf his son's arrival: he gave orders to admit him to his apartmentshile he dressed for dinner. The old prince always dressed inld-fashioned style, wearing an antique coat and powdered hair; andhen Prince Andrew entered his father's dressing room (not with theontemptuous look and manner he wore in drawing rooms, but with thenimated face with which he talked to Pierre), the old man was sittingn a large leather-covered chair, wrapped in a powdering mantle,ntrusting his head to Tikhon.
	"Ah! here's the warrior! Wants to vanquish Buonaparte?" said the oldan, shaking his powdered head as much as the tail, which Tikhon wasolding fast to plait, would allow.
	"You at least must tackle him properly, or else if he goes on likehis he'll soon have us, too, for his subjects! How are you?" And heeld out his cheek.
	The old man was in a good temper after his nap before dinner. (Hesed to say that a nap "after dinner was silver- before dinner,olden.") He cast happy, sidelong glances at his son from under hishick, bushy eyebrows. Prince Andrew went up and kissed his fathern the spot indicated to him. He made no reply on his father'savorite topic- making fun of the military men of the day, and morearticularly of Bonaparte.
	"Yes, Father, I have come come to you and brought my wife who isregnant," said Prince Andrew, following every movement of hisather's face with an eager and respectful look. "How is your health?"
	"Only fools and rakes fall ill, my boy. You know me: I am busyrom morning till night and abstemious, so of course I am well."
	"Thank God," said his son smiling.
	"God has nothing to do with it! Well, go on," he continued,eturning to his hobby; "tell me how the Germans have taught you toight Bonaparte by this new science you call 'strategy.'"
	Prince Andrew smiled.
	"Give me time to collect my wits, Father," said he, with a smilehat showed that his father's foibles did not prevent his son fromoving and honoring him. "Why, I have not yet had time to settleown!"
	"Nonsense, nonsense!" cried the old man, shaking his pigtail toee whether it was firmly plaited, and grasping his by the hand.The house for your wife is ready. Princess Mary will take her therend show her over, and they'll talk nineteen to the dozen. That'sheir woman's way! I am glad to have her. Sit down and talk. Aboutikhelson's army I understand- Tolstoy's too... a simultaneousxpedition.... But what's the southern army to do? Prussia iseutral... I know that. What about Austria?" said he, rising fromis chair and pacing up and down the room followed by Tikhon, whoan after him, handing him different articles of clothing. "What ofweden? How will they cross Pomerania?"
	Prince Andrew, seeing that his father insisted, began- at firsteluctantly, but gradually with more and more animation, and fromabit changing unconsciously from Russian to French as he went on-o explain the plan of operation for the coming campaign. He explainedow an army, ninety thousand strong, was to threaten Prussia so aso bring her out of her neutrality and draw her into the war; how partf that army was to join some Swedish forces at Stralsund; how twoundred and twenty thousand Austrians, with a hundred thousandussians, were to operate in Italy and on the Rhine; how fiftyhousand Russians and as many English were to land at Naples, andow a total force of five hundred thousand men was to attack therench from different sides. The old prince did not evince the leastnterest during this explanation, but as if he were not listening tot continued to dress while walking about, and three timesnexpectedly interrupted. Once he stopped it by shouting: "The whitene, the white one!"
	This meant that Tikhon was not handing him the waistcoat heanted. Another time he interrupted, saying:
	"And will she soon be confined?" and shaking his headeproachfully said: "That's bad! Go on, go on."
	The third interruption came when Prince Andrew was finishing hisescription. The old man began to sing, in the cracked voice of oldge: "Malbrook s'en va-t-en guerre. Dieu sait quand reviendra."*
	*"Marlborough is going to the wars; God knows when he'll return."
	His son only smiled.
	"I don't say it's a plan I approve of," said the son; "I am onlyelling you what it is. Napoleon has also formed his plan by now,ot worse than this one."
	"Well, you've told me nothing new," and the old man repeated,editatively and rapidly:
	"Dieu sait quand reviendra. Go to the dining room."BK1|CH27
	CHAPTER XXVII
	At the appointed hour the prince, powdered and shaven, entered theining room where his daughter-in-law, Princess Mary, and Mademoiselleourienne were already awaiting him together with his architect, whoy a strange caprice of his employer's was admitted to table thoughhe position of that insignificant individual was such as couldertainly not have caused him to expect that honor. The prince, whoenerally kept very strictly to social distinctions and rarelydmitted even important government officials to his table, hadnexpectedly selected Michael Ivanovich (who always went into a cornero blow his nose on his checked handkerchief) to illustrate the theoryhat all men are equals, and had more than once impressed on hisaughter that Michael Ivanovich was "not a whit worse than you or." At dinner the prince usually spoke to the taciturn Michaelvanovich more often than to anyone else.
	In the dining room, which like all the rooms in the house wasxceedingly lofty, the members of the household and the footmen- oneehind each chair- stood waiting for the prince to enter. The headutler, napkin on arm, was scanning the setting of the table, makingigns to the footmen, and anxiously glancing from the clock to theoor by which the prince was to enter. Prince Andrew was looking at large gilt frame, new to him, containing the genealogical tree ofhe Princes Bolkonski, opposite which hung another such frame with aadly painted portrait (evidently by the hand of the artistelonging to the estate) of a ruling prince, in a crown- an allegedescendant of Rurik and ancestor of the Bolkonskis. Prince Andrew,ooking again at that genealogical tree, shook his head, laughing as aan laughs who looks at a portrait so characteristic of the originals to be amusing.
	"How thoroughly like him that is!" he said to Princess Mary, who hadome up to him.
	Princess Mary looked at her brother in surprise. She did notnderstand what he was laughing at. Everything her father did inspireder with reverence and was beyond question.
	"Everyone has his Achilles' heel," continued Prince Andrew.Fancy, with his powerful mind, indulging in such nonsense!"
	Princess Mary could not understand the boldness of her brother'sriticism and was about to reply, when the expected footsteps wereeard coming from the study. The prince walked in quickly and jauntilys was his wont, as if intentionally contrasting the briskness ofis manners with the strict formality of his house. At that moment thereat clock struck two and another with a shrill tone joined in fromhe drawing room. The prince stood still; his lively glittering eyesrom under their thick, bushy eyebrows sternly scanned all present andested on the little princess. She felt, as courtiers do when the Tsarnters, the sensation of fear and respect which the old man inspiredn all around him. He stroked her hair and then patted her awkwardlyn the back of her neck.
	"I'm glad, glad, to see you," he said, looking attentively intoer eyes, and then quickly went to his place and sat down. "Sitown, sit down! Sit down, Michael Ianovich!"
	He indicated a place beside him to his daughter-in-law. A footmanoved the chair for her.
	"Ho, ho!" said the old man, casting his eyes on her roundedigure. "You've been in a hurry. That's bad!"
	He laughed in his usual dry, cold, unpleasant way, with his lipsnly and not with his eyes.
	"You must walk, walk as much as possible, as much as possible," heaid.
	The little princess did not, or did not wish to, hear his words. Sheas silent and seemed confused. The prince asked her about her father,nd she began to smile and talk. He asked about mutualcquaintances, and she became still more animated and chattered awayiving him greetings from various people and retailing the townossip.
	"Countess Apraksina, poor thing, has lost her husband and she hasried her eyes out," she said, growing more and more lively.
	As she became animated the prince looked at her more and moreternly, and suddenly, as if he had studied her sufficiently and hadormed a definite idea of her, he turned away and addressed Michaelvanovich.
	"Well, Michael Ivanovich, our Bonaparte will be having a bad time oft. Prince Andrew" (he always spoke thus of his son) "has been tellinge what forces are being collected against him! While you and Iever thought much of him."
	Michael Ivanovich did not at all know when "you and I" had said suchhings about Bonaparte, but understanding that he was wanted as aeg on which to hang the prince's favorite topic, he lookednquiringly at the young prince, wondering what would follow.
	"He is a great tactician!" said the prince to his son, pointing tohe architect.
	And the conversation again turned on the war, on Bonaparte, andhe generals and statesmen of the day. The old prince seemed convincedot only that all the men of the day were mere babies who did not knowhe A B C of war or of politics, and that Bonaparte was annsignificant little Frenchy, successful only because there were noonger any Potemkins or Suvorovs left to oppose him; but he was alsoonvinced that there were no political difficulties in Europe and noeal war, but only a sort of puppet show at which the men of the dayere playing, pretending to do something real. Prince Andrew gailyore with his father's ridicule of the new men, and drew him on andistened to him with evident pleasure.
	"The past always seems good," said he, "but did not Suvorovimself fall into a trap Moreau set him, and from which he did notnow how to escape?"
	"Who told you that? Who?" cried the prince. "Suvorov!" And he jerkedway his plate, which Tikhon briskly caught. "Suvorov!... Consider,rince Andrew. Two... Frederick and Suvorov; Moreau!... Moreau wouldave been a prisoner if Suvorov had had a free hand; but he had theofs-kriegs-wurst-schnapps-Rath on his hands. It would have puzzledhe devil himself! When you get there you'll find out what thoseofs-kriegs-wurst-Raths are! Suvorov couldn't manage them so whathance has Michael Kutuzov? No, my dear boy," he continued, "you andour generals won't get on against Buonaparte; you'll have to calln the French, so that birds of a feather may fight together. Theerman, Pahlen, has been sent to New York in America, to fetch therenchman, Moreau," he said, alluding to the invitation made that yearo Moreau to enter the Russian service.... "Wonderful!... Were theotemkins, Suvorovs, and Orlovs Germans? No, lad, either you fellowsave all lost your wits, or I have outlived mine. May God help you,ut we'll see what will happen. Buonaparte has become a greatommander among them! Hm!..."
	"I don't at all say that all the plans are good," said Princendrew, "I am only surprised at your opinion of Bonaparte. You mayaugh as much as you like, but all the same Bonaparte is a greatenerall"
	"Michael Ivanovich!" cried the old prince to the architect who, busyith his roast meat, hoped he had been forgotten: "Didn't I tell youuonaparte was a great tactician? Here, he says same thing."
	"To be sure, your excellency." replied the architect.
	The prince again laughed his frigid laugh.
	"Buonaparte was born with a silver spoon in his mouth. He has gotplendid soldiers. Besides he began by attacking Germans. And onlydlers have failed to beat the Germans. Since the world beganverybody has beaten the Germans. They beat no one- except onenother. He made his reputation fighting them."
	And the prince began explaining all the blunders which, according toim, Bonaparte had made in his campaigns and even in politics. His sonade no rejoinder, but it was evident that whatever arguments wereresented he was as little able as his father to change his opinion.e listened, refraining from a reply, and involuntarily wondered howhis old man, living alone in the country for so many years, couldnow and discuss so minutely and acutely all the recent Europeanilitary and political events.
	"You think I'm an old man and don't understand the present statef affairs?" concluded his father. "But it troubles me. I don'tleep at night. Come now, where has this great commander of yourshown his skill?" he concluded.
	"That would take too long to tell," answered the son.
	"Well, then go to your Buonaparte! Mademoiselle Bourienne, here'snother admirer of that powder-monkey emperor of yours," hexclaimed in excellent French.
	"You know, Prince, I am not a Bonapartist!"
	"Dieu sait quand reviendra"... hummed the prince out of tune and,ith a laugh still more so, he quitted the table.
	The little princess during the whole discussion and the rest ofhe dinner sat silent, glancing with a frightened look now at herather-in-law and now at Princess Mary. When they left the table sheook her sister-in-law's arm and drew her into another room.
	"What a clever man your father is," said she; "perhaps that is why Im afraid of him."
	"Oh, he is so kind!" answered Princess Mary.BK1|CH28
	CHAPTER XXVIII
	Prince Andrew was to leave next evening. The old prince, notltering his routine, retired as usual after dinner. The littlerincess was in her sister-in-law's room. Prince Andrew in a travelingoat without epaulettes had been packing with his valet in the roomsssigned to him. After inspecting the carriage himself and seeinghe trunks put in, he ordered the horses to be harnessed. Only thosehings he always kept with him remained in his room; a small box, aarge canteen fitted with silver plate, two Turkish pistols and aaber- a present from his father who had brought it from the siegef Ochakov. All these traveling effects of Prince Andrew's were inery good order: new, clean, and in cloth covers carefully tied withapes.
	When starting on a journey or changing their mode of life, menapable of reflection are generally in a serious frame of mind. Atuch moments one reviews the past and plans for the future. Princendrew's face looked very thoughtful and tender. With his hands behindim he paced briskly from corner to corner of the room, lookingtraight before him and thoughtfully shaking his head. Did he fearoing to the war, or was he sad at leaving his wife?- perhaps both,ut evidently he did not wish to be seen in that mood, for hearingootsteps in the passage he hurriedly unclasped his hands, stoppedt a table as if tying the cover of the small box, and assumed hissual tranquil and impenetrable expression. It was the heavy treadf Princess Mary that he heard.
	"I hear you have given orders to harness," she cried, panting (shead apparently been running), "and I did so wish to have anotheralk with you alone! God knows how long we may again be parted. Youre not angry with me for coming? You have changed so, Andrusha,"he added, as if to explain such a question.
	She smiled as she uttered his pet name, "Andrusha." It was obviouslytrange to her to think that this stern handsome man should bendrusha- the slender mischievous boy who had been her playfellow inhildhood.
	"And where is Lise?" he asked, answering her question only by amile.
	"She was so tired that she has fallen asleep on the sofa in my room.h, Andrew! What a treasure of a wife you have," said she, sittingown on the sofa, facing her brother. "She is quite a child: such aear, merry child. I have grown so fond of her."
	Prince Andrew was silent, but the princess noticed the ironicalnd contemptuous look that showed itself on his face.
	"One must be indulgent to little weaknesses; who is free fromhem, Andrew? Don't forget that she has grown up and been educatedn society, and so her position now is not a rosy one. We should enternto everyone's situation. Tout comprendre, c'est tout pardonner.*hink it must be for her, poor thing, after what she has been used to,o be parted from her husband and be left alone the country, in herondition! It's very hard."
	*To understand all is to forgive all.
	Prince Andrew smiled as he looked at his sister, as we smile athose we think we thoroughly understand.
	"You live in the country and don't think the life terrible," heeplied.
	"I... that's different. Why speak of me? I don't want any otherife, and can't, for I know no other. But think, Andrew: for a youngociety woman to be buried in the country during the best years of herife, all alone- for Papa is always busy, and I... well, you know whatoor resources I have for entertaining a woman used to the bestociety. There is only Mademoiselle Bourienne...."
	"I don't like your Mademoiselle Bourienne at all," said Princendrew.
	"No? She is very nice and kind and, above all, she's much to beitied. She has no one, no one. To tell the truth, I don't need her,nd she's even in my way. You know I always was a savage, and now amven more so. I like being alone.... Father likes her very much. Shend Michael Ivanovich are the two people to whom he is always gentlend kind, because he has been a benefactor to them both. As Sterneays: 'We don't love people so much for the good they have done us, asor the good we have done them.' Father took her when she was homelessfter losing her own father. She is very good-natured, and my fatherikes her way of reading. She reads to him in the evenings and readsplendidly."
	"To be quite frank, Mary, I expect Father's character sometimesakes things trying for you, doesn't it?" Prince Andrew askeduddenly.
	Princess Mary was first surprised and then aghast at this question.
	"For me? For me?... Trying for me!..." said she.
	"He always was rather harsh; and now I should think he's gettingery trying," said Prince Andrew, apparently speaking lightly of theirather in order to puzzle or test his sister.
	"You are good in every way, Andrew, but you have a kind ofntellectual pride," said the princess, following the train of her ownhoughts rather than the trend of the conversation- "and that's areat sin. How can one judge Father? But even if one might, whateeling except veneration could such a man as my father evoke? And Im so contented and happy with him. I only wish you were all asappy as I am."
	Her brother shook his head incredulously.
	"The only thing that is hard for me... I will tell you the truth,ndrew... is Father's way of treating religious subjects. I don'tnderstand how a man of his immense intellect can fail to see whats as clear as day, and can go so far astray. That is the only thinghat makes me unhappy. But even in this I can see lately a shade ofmprovement. His satire has been less bitter of late, and there was monk he received and had a long talk with."
	"Ah! my dear, I am afraid you and your monk are wasting yourowder," said Prince Andrew banteringly yet tenderly.
	"Ah! mon ami, I only pray, and hope that God will hear me.ndrew..." she said timidly after a moment's silence, "I have areat favor to ask of you."
	"What is it, dear?"
	"No- promise that you will not refuse! It will give you no troublend is nothing unworthy of you, but it will comfort me. Promise,ndrusha!..." said she, putting her hand in her reticule but not yetaking out what she was holding inside it, as if what she held werehe subject of her request and must not be shown before the requestas granted.
	She looked timidly at her brother.
	"Even if it were a great deal of trouble..." answered Prince Andrew,s if guessing what it was about.
	"Think what you please! I know you are just like Father. Think asou please, but do this for my sake! Please do! Father's father, ourrandfather, wore it in all his wars." (She still did not take outhat she was holding in her reticule.) "So you promise?"
	"Of course. What is it?"
	"Andrew, I bless you with this icon and you must promise me you willever take it off. Do you promise?"
	"If it does not weigh a hundredweight and won't break my neck...o please you..." said Prince Andrew. But immediately, noticing theained expression his joke had brought to his sister's face, heepented and added: "I am glad; really, dear, I am very glad."
	"Against your will He will save and have mercy on you and bringou to Himself, for in Him alone is truth and peace," said she in aoice trembling with emotion, solemnly holding up in both hands beforeer brother a small, oval, antique, dark-faced icon of the Saviourn a gold setting, on a finely wrought silver chain.
	She crossed herself, kissed the icon, and handed it to Andrew.
	"Please, Andrew, for my sake!..."
	Rays of gentle light shone from her large, timid eyes. Those eyesit up the whole of her thin, sickly face and made it beautiful. Herrother would have taken the icon, but she stopped him. Andrewnderstood, crossed himself and kissed the icon. There was a look ofenderness, for he was touched, but also a gleam of irony on his face.
	"Thank you, my dear." She kissed him on the forehead and sat downgain on the sofa. They were silent for a while.
	"As I was saying to you, Andrew, be kind and generous as youlways used to be. Don't judge Lise harshly," she began. "She is soweet, so good-natured, and her position now is a very hard one."
	"I do not think I have complained of my wife to you, Masha, orlamed her. Why do you say all this to me?"
	Red patches appeared on Princess Mary's face and she was silent asf she felt guilty.
	"I have said nothing to you, but you have already been talked to.nd I am sorry for that," he went on.
	The patches grew deeper on her forehead, neck, and cheeks. She triedo say something but could not. Her brother had guessed right: theittle princess had been crying after dinner and had spoken of herorebodings about her confinement, and how she dreaded it, and hadomplained of her fate, her father-in-law, and her husband. Afterrying she had fallen asleep. Prince Andrew felt sorry for his sister.
	"Know this, Masha: I can't reproach, have not reproached, andever shall reproach my wife with anything, and I cannot reproachyself with anything in regard to her; and that always will be so inhatever circumstances I may be placed. But if you want to know theruth... if you want to know whether I am happy? No! Is she happy? No!ut why this is so I don't know..."
	As he said this he rose, went to his sister, and, stooping, kisseder forehead. His fine eyes lit up with a thoughtful, kindly, andnaccustomed brightness, but he was looking not at his sister but overer head toward the darkness of the open doorway.
	"Let us go to her, I must say good-by. Or- go and wake and I'll comen a moment. Petrushka!" he called to his valet: "Come here, takehese away. Put this on the seat and this to the right."
	Princess Mary rose and moved to the door, then stopped and said:Andrew, if you had faith you would have turned to God and asked Himo give you the love you do not feel, and your prayer would haveeen answered."
	"Well, may be!" said Prince Andrew. "Go, Masha; I'll comemmediately."
	On the way to his sister's room, in the passage which connectedne wing with the other, Prince Andrew met Mademoiselle Bouriennemiling sweetly. It was the third time that day that, with an ecstaticnd artless smile, she had met him in secluded passages.
	"Oh! I thought you were in your room," she said, for some reasonlushing and dropping her eyes.
	Prince Andrew looked sternly at her and an expression of angeruddenly came over his face. He said nothing to her but looked ater forehead and hair, without looking at her eyes, with such contempthat the Frenchwoman blushed and went away without a word. When heeached his sister's room his wife was already awake and her merryoice, hurrying one word after another, came through the open door.he was speaking as usual in French, and as if after longelf-restraint she wished to make up for lost time.
	"No, but imagine the old Countess Zubova, with false curls and herouth full of false teeth, as if she were trying to cheat oldge.... Ha, ha, ha! Mary!"
	This very sentence about Countess Zubova and this same laughrince Andrew had already heard from his wife in the presence ofthers some five times. He entered the room softly. The littlerincess, plump and rosy, was sitting in an easy chair with her workn her hands, talking incessantly, repeating Petersburgeminiscences and even phrases. Prince Andrew came up, stroked herair, and asked if she felt rested after their journey. She answeredim and continued her chatter.
	The coach with six horses was waiting at the porch. It was an autumnight, so dark that the coachman could not see the carriage pole.ervants with lanterns were bustling about in the porch. The immenseouse was brilliant with lights shining through its lofty windows. Theomestic serfs were crowding in the hall, waiting to bid good-by tohe young prince. The members of the household were all gathered inhe reception hall: Michael Ivanovich, Mademoiselle Bourienne,rincess Mary, and the little princess. Prince Andrew had beenalled to his father's study as the latter wished to say good-by toim alone. All were waiting for them to come out.
	When Prince Andrew entered the study the old man in his old-agepectacles and white dressing gown, in which he received no one butis son, sat at the table writing. He glanced round.
	"Going?" And he went on writing.
	"I've come to say good-by."
	"Kiss me here," and he touched his cheek: "Thanks, thanks!"
	"What do you thank me for?"
	"For not dilly-dallying and not hanging to a woman's aprontrings. The Service before everything. Thanks, thanks!" And he wentn writing, so that his quill spluttered and squeaked. "If you havenything to say, say it. These two things can be done together," hedded.
	"About my wife... I am ashamed as it is to leave her on yourands..."
	"Why talk nonsense? Say what you want."
	"When her confinement is due, send to Moscow for an accoucheur....et him be here...."
	The old prince stopped writing and, as if not understanding, fixedis stern eyes on his son.
	"I know that no one can help if nature does not do her work," saidrince Andrew, evidently confused. "I know that out of a million casesnly one goes wrong, but it is her fancy and mine. They have beenelling her things. She has had a dream and is frightened."
	"Hm... Hm..." muttered the old prince to himself, finishing whate was writing. "I'll do it."
	He signed with a flourish and suddenly turning to his son began toaugh.
	"It's a bad business, eh?"
	"What is bad, Father?"
	"The wife!" said the old prince, briefly and significantly.
	"I don't understand!" said Prince Andrew.
	"No, it can't be helped, lad," said the prince. "They're all likehat; one can't unmarry. Don't be afraid; I won't tell anyone, but younow it yourself."
	He seized his son by the hand with small bony fingers, shook it,ooked straight into his son's face with keen eyes which seemed to seehrough him, and again laughed his frigid laugh.
	The son sighed, thus admitting that his father had understood him.he old man continued to fold and seal his letter, snatching up andhrowing down the wax, the seal, and the paper, with his accustomedapidity.
	"What's to be done? She's pretty! I will do everything. Make yourind easy," said he in abrupt sentences while sealing his letter.
	Andrew did not speak; he was both pleased and displeased that hisather understood him. The old man got up and gave the letter to hison.
	"Listen!" said he; "don't worry about your wife: what can be donehall be. Now listen! Give this letter to Michael Ilarionovich.* Iave written that he should make use of you in proper places and noteep you long as an adjutant: a bad position! Tell him I remembernd like him. Write and tell me how he receives you. If he is allight- serve him. Nicholas Bolkonski's son need not serve under anyonef he is in disfavor. Now come here."
	*Kutuzov.
	He spoke so rapidly that he did not finish half his words, but hison was accustomed to understand him. He led him to the desk, raisedhe lid, drew out a drawer, and took out an exercise book filledith his bold, tall, close handwriting.
	"I shall probably die before you. So remember, these are my memoirs;and them to the Emperor after my death. Now here is a Lombard bondnd a letter; it is a premium for the man who writes a history ofuvorov's wars. Send it to the Academy. Here are some jottings for youo read when I am gone. You will find them useful."
	Andrew did not tell his father that he would no doubt live a longime yet. He felt that he must not say it.
	"I will do it all, Father," he said.
	"Well, now, good-by!" He gave his son his hand to kiss, and embracedim. "Remember this, Prince Andrew, if they kill you it will hurte, your old father..." he paused unexpectedly, and then in auerulous voice suddenly shrieked: "but if I hear that you have notehaved like a son of Nicholas Bolkonski, I shall be ashamed!"
	"You need not have said that to me, Father," said the son with amile.
	The old man was silent.
	"I also wanted to ask you," continued Prince Andrew, "if I'milled and if I have a son, do not let him be taken away from you-s I said yesterday... let him grow up with you.... Please."
	"Not let the wife have him?" said the old man, and laughed.
	They stood silent, facing one another. The old man's sharp eyes wereixed straight on his son's. Something twitched in the lower part ofhe old prince's face.
	"We've said good-by. Go!" he suddenly shouted in a loud, angryoice, opening his door.
	"What is it? What?" asked both princesses when they saw for a momentt the door Prince Andrew and the figure of the old man in a whiteressing gown, spectacled and wigless, shouting in an angry voice.
	Prince Andrew sighed and made no reply.
	"Well!" he said, turning to his wife.
	And this "Well!" sounded coldly ironic, as if he were saying,:Now go through your performance."
	"Andrew, already!" said the little princess, turning pale andooking with dismay at her husband.
	He embraced her. She screamed and fell unconscious on his shoulder.
	He cautiously released the shoulder she leaned on, looked into herace, and carefully placed her in an easy chair.
	"Adieu, Mary," said he gently to his sister, taking her by theand and kissing her, and then he left the room with rapid steps.
	The little princess lay in the armchair, Mademoiselle Bouriennehafing her temples. Princess Mary, supporting her sister-in-law,till looked with her beautiful eyes full of tears at the door throughhich Prince Andrew had gone and made the sign of the cross in hisirection. From the study, like pistol shots, came the frequentound of the old man angrily blowing his nose. Hardly had Princendrew gone when the study door opened quickly and the stern figure ofhe old man in the white dressing gown looked out.
	"Gone? That's all right!" said he; and looking angrily at thenconscious little princess, he shook his head reprovingly and slammedhe door.BK2	                               BOOK TWO: 1805BK2|CH1
	CHAPTER I
	In October, 1805, a Russian army was occupying the villages andowns of the Archduchy of Austria, and yet other regiments freshlyrriving from Russia were settling near the fortress of Braunau andurdening the inhabitants on whom they were quartered. Braunau was theeadquarters of the commander-in-chief, Kutuzov.
	On October 11, 1805, one of the infantry regiments that had justeached Braunau had halted half a mile from the town, waiting to benspected by the commander in chief. Despite the un-Russian appearancef the locality and surroundings- fruit gardens, stone fences, tiledoofs, and hills in the distance- and despite the fact that thenhabitants (who gazed with curiosity at the soldiers) were notussians, the regiment had just the appearance of any Russian regimentreparing for an inspection anywhere in the heart of Russia.
	On the evening of the last day's march an order had been receivedhat the commander in chief would inspect the regiment on the march.hough the words of the order were not clear to the regimentalommander, and the question arose whether the troops were to be inarching order or not, it was decided at a consultation between theattalion commanders to present the regiment in parade order, on therinciple that it is always better to "bow too low than not bow lownough." So the soldiers, after a twenty-mile march, were kept mendingnd cleaning all night long without closing their eyes, while thedjutants and company commanders calculated and reckoned, and byorning the regiment- instead of the straggling, disorderly crowd itad been on its last march the day before- presented a well-orderedrray of two thousand men each of whom knew his place and his duty,ad every button and every strap in place, and shone with cleanliness.nd not only externally was all in order, but had it pleased theommander in chief to look under the uniforms he would have found onvery man a clean shirt, and in every knapsack the appointed number ofrticles, "awl, soap, and all," as the soldiers say. There was onlyne circumstance concerning which no one could be at ease. It washe state of the soldiers' boots. More than half the men's bootsere in holes. But this defect was not due to any fault of theegimental commander, for in spite of repeated demands boots had noteen issued by the Austrian commissariat, and the regiment had marchedome seven hundred miles.
	The commander of the regiment was an elderly, choleric, stout, andhick-set general with grizzled eyebrows and whiskers, and widerrom chest to back than across the shoulders. He had on a brand-newniform showing the creases where it had been folded and thick goldpaulettes which seemed to stand rather than lie down on his massivehoulders. He had the air of a man happily performing one of theost solemn duties of his life. He walked about in front of the linend at every step pulled himself up, slightly arching his back. It waslain that the commander admired his regiment, rejoiced in it, andhat his whole mind was engrossed by it, yet his strut seemed tondicate that, besides military matters, social interests and the fairex occupied no small part of his thoughts.
	"Well, Michael Mitrich, sir?" he said, addressing one of theattalion commanders who smilingly pressed forward (it was plainhat they both felt happy). "We had our hands full last night.owever, I think the regiment is not a bad one, eh?"
	The battalion commander perceived the jovial irony and laughed.
	"It would not be turned off the field even on the Tsaritsin Meadow."
	"What?" asked the commander.
	At that moment, on the road from the town on which signalers hadeen posted, two men appeared on horse back. They were anide-decamp followed by a Cossack.
	The aide-de-camp was sent to confirm the order which had not beenlearly worded the day before, namely, that the commander in chiefished to see the regiment just in the state in which it had been onhe march: in their greatcoats, and packs, and without any preparationhatever.
	A member of the Hofkriegsrath from Vienna had come to Kutuzov theay before with proposals and demands for him to join up with the armyf the Archduke Ferdinand and Mack, and Kutuzov, not consideringhis junction advisable, meant, among other arguments in support ofis view, to show the Austrian general the wretched state in which theroops arrived from Russia. With this object he intended to meet theegiment; so the worse the condition it was in, the better pleased theommander in chief would be. Though the aide-de-camp did not knowhese circumstances, he nevertheless delivered the definite order thathe men should be in their greatcoats and in marching order, andhat the commander in chief would otherwise be dissatisfied. Onearing this the regimental commander hung his head, silently shruggedis shoulders, and spread out his arms with a choleric gesture.
	"A fine mess we've made of it!" he remarked.
	"There now! Didn't I tell you, Michael Mitrich, that if it wasaid 'on the march' it meant in greatcoats?" said he reproachfullyo the battalion commander. "Oh, my God!" he added, steppingesolutely forward. "Company commanders!" he shouted in a voiceccustomed to command. "Sergeants major!... How soon will he be here?"e asked the aide-de-camp with a respectful politeness evidentlyelating to the personage he was referring to.
	"In an hour's time, I should say."
	"Shall we have time to change clothes?"
	"I don't know, General...."
	The regimental commander, going up to the line himself, orderedhe soldiers to change into their greatcoats. The company commandersan off to their companies, the sergeants major began bustling (thereatcoats were not in very good condition), and instantly the squareshat had up to then been in regular order and silent began to sway andtretch and hum with voices. On all sides soldiers were running to andro, throwing up their knapsacks with a jerk of their shoulders andulling the straps over their heads, unstrapping their overcoats andrawing the sleeves on with upraised arms.
	In half an hour all was again in order, only the squares hadecome gray instead of black. The regimental commander walked with hiserky steps to the front of the regiment and examined it from aistance.
	"Whatever is this? This!" he shouted and stood still. "Commanderf the third company!"
	"Commander of the third company wanted by the general!...ommander to the general... third company to the commander." The wordsassed along the lines and an adjutant ran to look for the missingfficer.
	When the eager but misrepeated words had reached their destinationn a cry of: "The general to the third company," the missing officerppeared from behind his company and, though he was a middle-agedan and not in the habit of running, trotted awkwardly stumbling onis toes toward the general. The captain's face showed theneasiness of a schoolboy who is told to repeat a lesson he has notearned. Spots appeared on his nose, the redness of which wasvidently due to intemperance, and his mouth twitched nervously. Theeneral looked the captain up and down as he came up panting,lackening his pace as he approached.
	"You will soon be dressing your men in petticoats! What is this?"houted the regimental commander, thrusting forward his jaw andointing at a soldier in the ranks of the third company in a greatcoatf bluish cloth, which contrasted with the others. "What have you beenfter? The commander in chief is expected and you leave your place?h? I'll teach you to dress the men in fancy coats for a parade....h...?"
	The commander of the company, with his eyes fixed on his superior,ressed two fingers more and more rigidly to his cap, as if in thisressure lay his only hope of salvation.
	"Well, why don't you speak? Whom have you got there dressed up as Hungarian?" said the commander with an austere gibe.
	"Your excellency..."
	"Well, your excellency, what? Your excellency! But what about yourxcellency?... nobody knows."
	"Your excellency, it's the officer Dolokhov, who has been reduced tohe ranks," said the captain softly.
	"Well? Has he been degraded into a field marshal, or into a soldier?f a soldier, he should be dressed in regulation uniform like thethers."
	"Your excellency, you gave him leave yourself, on the march."
	"Gave him leave? Leave? That's just like you young men," said theegimental commander cooling down a little. "Leave indeed.... One says word to you and you... What?" he added with renewed irritation, "Ieg you to dress your men decently."
	And the commander, turning to look at the adjutant, directed hiserky steps down the line. He was evidently pleased at his own displayf anger and walking up to the regiment wished to find a furtherxcuse for wrath. Having snapped at an officer for an unpolishedadge, at another because his line was not straight, he reached thehird company.
	"H-o-o-w are you standing? Where's your leg? Your leg?" shoutedhe commander with a tone of suffering in his voice, while thereere still five men between him and Dolokhov with his bluish-grayniform.
	Dolokhov slowly straightened his bent knee, looking straight withis clear, insolent eyes in the general's face.
	"Why a blue coat? Off with it... Sergeant major! Change hisoat... the ras..." he did not finish.
	"General, I must obey orders, but I am not bound to endure..."olokhov hurriedly interrupted.
	"No talking in the ranks!... No talking, no talking!"
	"Not bound to endure insults," Dolokhov concluded in loud, ringingones.
	The eyes of the general and the soldier met. The general becameilent, angrily pulling down his tight scarf.
	"I request you to have the goodness to change your coat," he said ase turned away.BK2|CH2
	CHAPTER II
	"He's coming!" shouted the signaler at that moment.
	The regimental commander, flushing, ran to his horse, seized thetirrup with trembling hands, threw his body across the saddle,ighted himself, drew his saber, and with a happy and resoluteountenance, opening his mouth awry, prepared to shout. The regimentluttered like a bird preening its plumage and became motionless.
	"Att-ention!" shouted the regimental commander in a soul-shakingoice which expressed joy for himself, severity for the regiment,nd welcome for the approaching chief.
	Along the broad country road, edged on both sides by trees, came aigh, light blue Viennese caleche, slightly creaking on its springsnd drawn by six horses at a smart trot. Behind the caleche gallopedhe suite and a convoy of Croats. Beside Kutuzov sat an Austrianeneral, in a white uniform that looked strange among the Russianlack ones. The caleche stopped in front of the regiment. Kutuzovnd the Austrian general were talking in low voices and Kutuzov smiledlightly as treading heavily he stepped down from the carriage just asf those two thousand men breathlessly gazing at him and theegimental commander did not exist.
	The word of command rang out, and again the regiment quivered, asith a jingling sound it presented arms. Then amidst a dead silencehe feeble voice of the commander in chief was heard. The regimentoared, "Health to your ex... len... len... lency!" and again allecame silent. At first Kutuzov stood still while the regimentoved; then he and the general in white, accompanied by the suite,alked between the ranks.
	From the way the regimental commander saluted the commander in chiefnd devoured him with his eyes, drawing himself up obsequiously, androm the way he walked through the ranks behind the generals,ending forward and hardly able to restrain his jerky movements, androm the way he darted forward at every word or gesture of theommander in chief, it was evident that he performed his duty as aubordinate with even greater zeal than his duty as a commander.hanks to the strictness and assiduity of its commander theegiment, in comparison with others that had reached Braunau at theame time, was in splendid condition. There were only 217 sick andtragglers. Everything was in good order except the boots.
	Kutuzov walked through the ranks, sometimes stopping to say a fewriendly words to officers he had known in the Turkish war,ometimes also to the soldiers. Looking at their boots he severalimes shook his head sadly, pointing them out to the Austrianeneral with an expression which seemed to say that he was not blamingnyone, but could not help noticing what a bad state of things it was.he regimental commander ran forward on each such occasion, fearing toiss a single word of the commander in chief's regarding the regiment.ehind Kutuzov, at a distance that allowed every softly spoken word toe heard, followed some twenty men of his suite. These gentlemenalked among themselves and sometimes laughed. Nearest of all to theommander in chief walked a handsome adjutant. This was Princeolkonski. Beside him was his comrade Nesvitski, a tall staff officer,xtremely stout, with a kindly, smiling, handsome face and moist eyes.esvitski could hardly keep from laughter provoked by a swarthy hussarfficer who walked beside him. This hussar, with a grave face andithout a smile or a change in the expression of his fixed eyes,atched the regimental commander's back and mimicked his everyovement. Each time the commander started and bent forward, the hussartarted and bent forward in exactly the same manner. Nesvitski laughednd nudged the others to make them look at the wag.
	Kutuzov walked slowly and languidly past thousands of eyes whichere starting from their sockets to watch their chief. On reaching thehird company he suddenly stopped. His suite, not having expectedhis, involuntarily came closer to him.
	"Ah, Timokhin!" said he, recognizing the red-nosed captain who hadeen reprimanded on account of the blue greatcoat.
	One would have thought it impossible for a man to stretch himselfore than Timokhin had done when he was reprimanded by theegimental commander, but now that the commander in chief addressedim he drew himself up to such an extent that it seemed he could notave sustained it had the commander in chief continued to look at him,nd so Kutuzov, who evidently understood his case and wished himothing but good, quickly turned away, a scarcely perceptible smilelitting over his scarred and puffy face.
	"Another Ismail comrade," said he. "A brave officer! Are youatisfied with him?" he asked the regimental commander.
	And the latter- unconscious that he was being reflected in theussar officer as in a looking glass- started, moved forward, andnswered: "Highly satisfied, your excellency!"
	"We all have our weaknesses," said Kutuzov smiling and walkingway from him. "He used to have a predilection for Bacchus."
	The regimental commander was afraid he might be blamed for thisnd did not answer. The hussar at that moment noticed the face ofhe red-nosed captain and his drawn-in stomach, and mimicked hisxpression and pose with such exactitude that Nesvitski could not helpaughing. Kutuzov turned round. The officer evidently had completeontrol of his face, and while Kutuzov was turning managed to make arimace and then assume a most serious, deferential, and innocentxpression.
	The third company was the last, and Kutuzov pondered, apparentlyrying to recollect something. Prince Andrew stepped forward frommong the suite and said in French:
	"You told me to remind you of the officer Dolokhov, reduced to theanks in this regiment."
	"Where is Dolokhov?" asked Kutuzov.
	Dolokhov, who had already changed into a soldier's gray greatcoat,id not wait to be called. The shapely figure of the fair-hairedoldier, with his clear blue eyes, stepped forward from the ranks,ent up to the commander in chief, and presented arms.
	"Have you a complaint to make?" Kutuzov asked with a slight frown.
	"This is Dolokhov," said Prince Andrew.
	"Ah!" said Kutuzov. "I hope this will be a lesson to you. Do youruty. The Emperor is gracious, and I shan't forget you if youeserve well."
	The clear blue eyes looked at the commander in chief just asoldly as they had looked at the regimental commander, seeming byheir expression to tear open the veil of convention that separates commander in chief so widely from a private.
	"One thing I ask of your excellency," Dolokhov said in his firm,inging, deliberate voice. "I ask an opportunity to atone for my faultnd prove my devotion to His Majesty the Emperor and to Russia!"
	Kutuzov turned away. The same smile of the eyes with which he hadurned from Captain Timokhin again flitted over his face. He turnedway with a grimace as if to say that everything Dolokhov had saido him and everything he could say had long been known to him, that heas weary of it and it was not at all what he wanted. He turned awaynd went to the carriage.
	The regiment broke up into companies, which went to theirppointed quarters near Braunau, where they hoped to receive boots andlothes and to rest after their hard marches.
	"You won't bear me a grudge, Prokhor Ignatych?" said theegimental commander, overtaking the third company on its way to itsuarters and riding up to Captain Timokhin who was walking in front.The regimental commander's face now that the inspection was happilyver beamed with irrepressible delight.) "It's in the Emperor'service... it can't be helped... one is sometimes a bit hasty onarade... I am the first to apologize, you know me!... He was veryleased!" And he held out his hand to the captain.
	"Don't mention it, General, as if I'd be so bold!" replied theaptain, his nose growing redder as he gave a smile which showed wherewo front teeth were missing that had been knocked out by the butt endf a gun at Ismail.
	"And tell Mr. Dolokhov that I won't forget him- he may be quiteasy. And tell me, please- I've been meaning to ask- how is to ask-ow is he behaving himself, and in general..."
	"As far as the service goes he is quite punctilious, yourxcellency; but his character..." said Timokhin.
	"And what about his character?" asked the regimental commander.
	"It's different on different days," answered the captain. "One daye is sensible, well educated, and good-natured, and the next he's aild beast.... In Poland, if you please, he nearly killed a Jew."
	"Oh, well, well!" remarked the regimental commander. "Still, oneust have pity on a young man in misfortune. You know he has importantonnections... Well, then, you just..."
	"I will, your excellency," said Timokhin, showing by his smilehat he understood his commander's wish.
	"Well, of course, of course!"
	The regimental commander sought out Dolokhov in the ranks and,eining in his horse, said to him:
	"After the next affair... epaulettes."
	Dolokhov looked round but did not say anything, nor did theocking smile on his lips change.
	"Well, that's all right," continued the regimental commander. "A cupf vodka for the men from me," he added so that the soldiers couldear. "I thank you all! God be praised!" and he rode past that companynd overtook the next one.
	"Well, he's really a good fellow, one can serve under him," saidimokhin to the subaltern beside him.
	"In a word, a hearty one..." said the subaltern, laughing (theegimental commander was nicknamed King of Hearts).
	The cheerful mood of their officers after the inspection infectedhe soldiers. The company marched on gaily. The soldiers' voices coulde heard on every side.
	"And they said Kutuzov was blind of one eye?"
	"And so he is! Quite blind!"
	"No, friend, he is sharper-eyed than you are. Boots and leg bands...e noticed everything..."
	"When he looked at my feet, friend... well, thinks I..."
	"And that other one with him, the Austrian, looked as if he weremeared with chalk- as white as flour! I suppose they polish him up ashey do the guns."
	"I say, Fedeshon!... Did he say when the battles are to begin? Youere near him. Everybody said that Buonaparte himself was at Braunau."
	"Buonaparte himself!... Just listen to the fool, what he doesn'tnow! The Prussians are up in arms now. The Austrians, you see, areutting them down. When they've been put down, the war with Buonaparteill begin. And he says Buonaparte is in Braunau! Shows you're a fool.ou'd better listen more carefully!"
	"What devils these quartermasters are! See, the fifth company isurning into the village already... they will have their buckwheatooked before we reach our quarters."
	"Give me a biscuit, you devil!"
	"And did you give me tobacco yesterday? That's just it, friend!h, well, never mind, here you are."
	"They might call a halt here or we'll have to do another fouriles without eating."
	"Wasn't it fine when those Germans gave us lifts! You just sit stillnd are drawn along."
	"And here, friend, the people are quite beggarly. There they alleemed to be Poles- all under the Russian crown- but here they'rell regular Germans."
	"Singers to the front " came the captain's order.
	And from the different ranks some twenty men ran to the front. Arummer, their leader, turned round facing the singers, andlourishing his arm, began a long-drawn-out soldiers' song, commencingith the words: "Morning dawned, the sun was rising," andoncluding: "On then, brothers, on to glory, led by Fatheramenski." This song had been composed in the Turkish campaign and noweing sung in Austria, the only change being that the words "Fatheramenski" were replaced by "Father Kutuzov."
	Having jerked out these last words as soldiers do and waved his armss if flinging something to the ground, the drummer- a lean,andsome soldier of forty- looked sternly at the singers and screwedp his eyes. Then having satisfied himself that all eyes were fixed onim, he raised both arms as if carefully lifting some invisible butrecious object above his head and, holding it there for some seconds,uddenly flung it down and began:
	"Oh, my bower, oh, my bower...!"
	"Oh, my bower new...!" chimed in twenty voices, and the castanetlayer, in spite of the burden of his equipment, rushed out to theront and, walking backwards before the company, jerked hishoulders and flourished his castanets as if threatening someone.he soldiers, swinging their arms and keeping time spontaneously,arched with long steps. Behind the company the sound of wheels, thereaking of springs, and the tramp of horses' hoofs were heard.utuzov and his suite were returning to the town. The commander inhief made a sign that the men should continue to march at ease, ande and all his suite showed pleasure at the sound of the singing andhe sight of the dancing soldier and the gay and smartly marching men.n the second file from the right flank, beside which the carriageassed the company, a blue-eyed soldier involuntarily attractedotice. It was Dolokhov marching with particular grace and boldness inime to the song and looking at those driving past as if he pitied allho were not at that moment marching with the company. The hussarornet of Kutuzov's suite who had mimicked the regimental commander,ell back from the carriage and rode up to Dolokhov.
	Hussar cornet Zherkov had at one time, in Petersburg, belonged tohe wild set led by Dolokhov. Zherkov had met Dolokhov abroad as arivate and had not seen fit to recognize him. But now that Kutuzovad spoken to the gentleman ranker, he addressed him with theordiality of an old friend.
	"My dear fellow, how are you?" said he through the singing, makingis horse keep pace with the company.
	"How am I?" Dolokhov answered coldly. "I am as you see."
	The lively song gave a special flavor to the tone of free and easyaiety with which Zherkov spoke, and to the intentional coldness ofolokhov's reply.
	"And how do you get on with the officers?" inquired Zherkov.
	"All right. They are good fellows. And how have you wriggled ontohe staff?"
	"I was attached; I'm on duty."
	Both were silent.
	"She let the hawk fly upward from her wide right sleeve," went theong, arousing an involuntary sensation of courage and cheerfulness.heir conversation would probably have been different but for theffect of that song.
	"Is it true that Austrians have been beaten?" asked Dolokhov.
	"The devil only knows! They say so."
	"I'm glad," answered Dolokhov briefly and clearly, as the songemanded.
	"I say, come round some evening and we'll have a game of faro!" saidherkov.
	"Why, have you too much money?"
	"Do come."
	"I can't. I've sworn not to. I won't drink and won't play till I geteinstated."
	"Well, that's only till the first engagement."
	"We shall see."
	They were again silent.
	"Come if you need anything. One can at least be of use on thetaff..."
	Dolokhov smiled. "Don't trouble. If I want anything, I won't beg-'ll take it!"
	"Well, never mind; I only..."
	"And I only..."
	"Good-by."
	"Good health..."
	        "It's a long, long way.
	        To my native land..."
	Zherkov touched his horse with the spurs; it pranced excitedlyrom foot to foot uncertain with which to start, then settled down,alloped past the company, and overtook the carriage, still keepingime to the song.BK2|CH3
	CHAPTER III
	On returning from the review, Kutuzov took the Austrian general intois private room and, calling his adjutant, asked for some paperselating to the condition of the troops on their arrival, and theetters that had come from the Archduke Ferdinand, who was inommand of the advanced army. Prince Andrew Bolkonski came into theoom with the required papers. Kutuzov and the Austrian member ofhe Hofkriegsrath were sitting at the table on which a plan was spreadut.
	"Ah!..." said Kutuzov glancing at Bolkonski as if by thisxclamation he was asking the adjutant to wait, and he went on withhe conversation in French.
	"All I can say, General," said he with a pleasant elegance ofxpression and intonation that obliged one to listen to eacheliberately spoken word. It was evident that Kutuzov himself listenedith pleasure to his own voice. "All I can say, General, is that ifhe matter depended on my personal wishes, the will of His Majesty themperor Francis would have been fulfilled long ago. I should longgo have joined the archduke. And believe me on my honour that to meersonally it would be a pleasure to hand over the supreme commandf the army into the hands of a better informed and more skillfuleneral- of whom Austria has so many- and to lay down all this heavyesponsibility. But circumstances are sometimes too strong for us,eneral."
	And Kutuzov smiled in a way that seemed to say, "You are quite atiberty not to believe me and I don't even care whether you do or not,ut you have no grounds for telling me so. And that is the wholeoint."
	The Austrian general looked dissatisfied, but had no option but toeply in the same tone.
	"On the contrary," he said, in a querulous and angry tone thatontrasted with his flattering words, "on the contrary, yourxcellency's participation in the common action is highly valued byis Majesty; but we think the present delay is depriving theplendid Russian troops and their commander of the laurels they haveeen accustomed to win in their battles," he concluded his evidentlyrearranged sentence.
	Kutuzov bowed with the same smile.
	"But that is my conviction, and judging by the last letter withhich His Highness the Archduke Ferdinand has honored me, I imaginehat the Austrian troops, under the direction of so skillful aeader as General Mack, have by now already gained a decisiveictory and no longer need our aid," said Kutuzov.
	The general frowned. Though there was no definite news of anustrian defeat, there were many circumstances confirming thenfavorable rumors that were afloat, and so Kutuzov's suggestion of anustrian victory sounded much like irony. But Kutuzov went onlandly smiling with the same expression, which seemed to say thate had a right to suppose so. And, in fact, the last letter he hadeceived from Mack's army informed him of a victory and statedtrategically the position of the army was very favorable.
	"Give me that letter," said Kutuzov turning to Prince Andrew.Please have a look at it"- and Kutuzov with an ironical smile abouthe corners of his mouth read to the Austrian general the followingassage, in German, from the Archduke Ferdinand's letter:
	We have fully concentrated forces of nearly seventy thousand menith which to attack and defeat the enemy should he cross the Lech.lso, as we are masters of Ulm, we cannot be deprived of the advantagef commanding both sides of the Danube, so that should the enemy notross the Lech, we can cross the Danube, throw ourselves on his linef communications, recross the river lower down, and frustrate hisntention should he try to direct his whole force against our faithfullly. We shall therefore confidently await the moment when themperial Russian army will be fully equipped, and shall then, inonjunction with it, easily find a way to prepare for the enemy theate he deserves.
	Kutuzov sighed deeply on finishing this paragraph and looked athe member of the Hofkriegsrath mildly and attentively.
	"But you know the wise maxim your excellency, advising one to expecthe worst," said the Austrian general, evidently wishing to haveone with jests and to come to business. He involuntarily looked roundt the aide-de-camp.
	"Excuse me, General," interrupted Kutuzov, also turning to Princendrew. "Look here, my dear fellow, get from Kozlovski all the reportsrom our scouts. Here are two letters from Count Nostitz and here isne from His Highness the Archduke Ferdinand and here are these," heaid, handing him several papers, "make a neat memorandum in Frenchut of all this, showing all the news we have had of the movementsf the Austrian army, and then give it to his excellency."
	Prince Andrew bowed his head in token of having understood fromhe first not only what had been said but also what Kutuzov would haveiked to tell him. He gathered up the papers and with a bow to both,tepped softly over the carpet and went out into the waiting room.
	Though not much time had passed since Prince Andrew had left Russia,e had changed greatly during that period. In the expression of hisace, in his movements, in his walk, scarcely a trace was left ofis former affected languor and indolence. He now looked like a manho has time to think of the impression he makes on others, but isccupied with agreeable and interesting work. His face expressedore satisfaction with himself and those around him, his smile andlance were brighter and more attractive.
	Kutuzov, whom he had overtaken in Poland, had received him veryindly, promised not to forget him, distinguished him above thether adjutants, and had taken him to Vienna and given him the moreerious commissions. From Vienna Kutuzov wrote to his old comrade,rince Andrew's father.
	Your son bids fair to become an officer distinguished by hisndustry, firmness, and expedition. I consider myself fortunate toave such a subordinate by me.
	On Kutuzov's staff, among his fellow officers and in the armyenerally, Prince Andrew had, as he had had in Petersburg society, twouite opposite reputations. Some, a minority, acknowledged him to beifferent from themselves and from everyone else, expected greathings of him, listened to him, admired, and imitated him, and withhem Prince Andrew was natural and pleasant. Others, the majority,isliked him and considered him conceited, cold, and disagreeable. Butmong these people Prince Andrew knew how to take his stand so thathey respected and even feared him.
	Coming out of Kutuzov's room into the waiting room with the papersn his hand Prince Andrew came up to his comrade, the aide-de-campn duty, Kozlovski, who was sitting at the window with a book.
	"Well, Prince?" asked Kozlovski.
	"I am ordered to write a memorandum explaining why we are notdvancing."
	"And why is it?"
	Prince Andrew shrugged his shoulders.
	"Any news from Mack?"
	"No."
	"If it were true that he has been beaten, news would have come."
	"Probably," said Prince Andrew moving toward the outer door.
	But at that instant a tall Austrian general in a greatcoat, with therder of Maria Theresa on his neck and a black bandage round his head,ho had evidently just arrived, entered quickly, slamming the door.rince Andrew stopped short.
	"Commander in Chief Kutuzov?" said the newly arrived generalpeaking quickly with a harsh German accent, looking to both sides anddvancing straight toward the inner door.
	"The commander in chief is engaged," said Kozlovski, going hurriedlyp to the unknown general and blocking his way to the door. "Whomhall I announce?"
	The unknown general looked disdainfully down at Kozlovski, who wasather short, as if surprised that anyone should not know him.
	"The commander in chief is engaged," repeated Kozlovski calmly.
	The general's face clouded, his lips quivered and trembled. Heook out a notebook, hurriedly scribbled something in pencil, tore outhe leaf, gave it to Kozlovski, stepped quickly to the window, andhrew himself into a chair, gazing at those in the room as ifsking, "Why do they look at me?" Then he lifted his head, stretchedis neck as if he intended to say something, but immediately, withffected indifference, began to hum to himself, producing a queeround which immediately broke off. The door of the private room openednd Kutuzov appeared in the doorway. The general with the bandagedead bent forward as though running away from some danger, and, makingong, quick strides with his thin legs, went up to Kutuzov.
	"Vous voyez le malheureux Mack," he uttered in a broken voice.
	Kutuzov's face as he stood in the open doorway remained perfectlymmobile for a few moments. Then wrinkles ran over his face like aave and his forehead became smooth again, he bowed his headespectfully, closed his eyes, silently let Mack enter his room beforeim, and closed the door himself behind him.
	The report which had been circulated that the Austrians had beeneaten and that the whole army had surrendered at Ulm proved to beorrect. Within half an hour adjutants had been sent in variousirections with orders which showed that the Russian troops, who haditherto been inactive, would also soon have to meet the enemy.
	Prince Andrew was one of those rare staff officers whose chiefnterest lay in the general progress of the war. When he saw Macknd heard the details of his disaster he understood that half theampaign was lost, understood all the difficulties of the Russianrmy's position, and vividly imagined what awaited it and the parte would have to play. Involuntarily he felt a joyful agitation at thehought of the humiliation of arrogant Austria and that in a week'sime he might, perhaps, see and take part in the first Russianncounter with the French since Suvorov met them. He feared thatonaparte's genius might outweigh all the courage of the Russianroops, and at the same time could not admit the idea of his heroeing disgraced.
	Excited and irritated by these thoughts Prince Andrew went towardis room to write to his father, to whom he wrote every day. In theorridor he met Nesvitski, with whom he shared a room, and the wagherkov; they were as usual laughing.
	"Why are you so glum?" asked Nesvitski noticing Prince Andrew's paleace and glittering eyes.
	"There's nothing to be gay about," answered Bolkonski.
	Just as Prince Andrew met Nesvitski and Zherkov, there came towardhem from the other end of the corridor, Strauch, an Austrianeneral who on Kutuzov's staff in charge of the provisioning of theussian army, and the member of the Hofkriegsrath who had arrivedhe previous evening. There was room enough in the wide corridor forhe generals to pass the three officers quite easily, but Zherkov,ushing Nesvitski aside with his arm, said in a breathless voice,
	"They're coming!... they're coming!... Stand aside, make way, pleaseake way!"
	The generals were passing by, looking as if they wished to avoidmbarrassing attentions. On the face of the wag Zherkov there suddenlyppeared a stupid smile of glee which he seemed unable to suppress.
	"Your excellency," said he in German, stepping forward andddressing the Austrian general, "I have the honor to congratulateou."
	He bowed his head and scraped first with one foot and then withhe other, awkwardly, like a child at a dancing lesson.
	The member of the Hofkriegsrath looked at him severely but, seeinghe seriousness of his stupid smile, could not but give him a moment'sttention. He screwed up his eyes showing that he was listening.
	"I have the honor to congratulate you. General Mack has arrived,uite well, only a little bruised just here," he added, pointingith a beaming smile to his head.
	The general frowned, turned away, and went on.
	"Gott, wie naiv!"* said he angrily, after he had gone a few steps.
	*"Good God, what simplicity!"
	Nesvitski with a laugh threw his arms round Prince Andrew, butolkonski, turning still paler, pushed him away with an angry look andurned to Zherkov. The nervous irritation aroused by the appearance ofack, the news of his defeat, and the thought of what lay before theussian army found vent in anger at Zherkov's untimely jest.
	"If you, sir, choose to make a buffoon of yourself," he saidharply, with a slight trembling of the lower jaw, "I can't preventour doing so; but I warn you that if you dare to play the fool iny presence, I will teach you to behave yourself."
	Nesvitski and Zherkov were so surprised by this outburst that theyazed at Bolkonski silently with wide-open eyes.
	"What's the matter? I only congratulated them," said Zherkov.
	"I am not jesting with you; please be silent!" cried Bolkonski,nd taking Nesvitski's arm he left Zherkov, who did not know what toay.
	"Come, what's the matter, old fellow?" said Nesvitski trying tooothe him.
	"What's the matter?" exclaimed Prince Andrew standing still in hisxcitement. "Don't you understand that either we are officerserving our Tsar and our country, rejoicing in the successes andrieving at the misfortunes of our common cause, or we are merelyackeys who care nothing for their master's business. Quarante milleommes massacres et l'armee de nos allies detruite, et vous trouvez lae mot pour rire,"* he said, as if strengthening his views by thisrench sentence. "C' est bien pour un garcon de rein comme cetndividu dont vous avez fait un ami, mais pas pour vous, pas pourous.*[2] Only a hobbledehoy could amuse himself in this way," hedded in Russian- but pronouncing the word with a French accent-aving noticed that Zherkov could still hear him.
	*"Forty thousand men massacred and the army of our allies destroyed,nd you find that a cause for jesting!"
	*[2] "It is all very well for that good-for-nothing fellow of whomou have made a friend, but not for you, not for you."
	He waited a moment to see whether the cornet would answer, but heurned and went out of the corridor.BK2|CH4
	CHAPTER IV
	The Pavlograd Hussars were stationed two miles from Braunau. Thequadron in which Nicholas Rostov served as a cadet was quartered inhe German village of Salzeneck. The best quarters in the village weressigned to cavalry-captain Denisov, the squadron commander, knownhroughout the whole cavalry division as Vaska Denisov. Cadetostov, ever since he had overtaken the regiment in Poland, hadived with the squadron commander.
	On October 11, the day when all was astir at headquarters over theews of Mack's defeat, the camp life of the officers of thisquadron was proceeding as usual. Denisov, who had been losing atards all night, had not yet come home when Rostov rode back earlyn the morning from a foraging expedition. Rostov in his cadetniform, with a jerk to his horse, rode up to the porch, swung his legver the saddle with a supple youthful movement, stood for a moment inhe stirrup as if loathe to part from his horse, and at last sprangown and called to his orderly.
	"Ah, Bondarenko, dear friend!" said he to the hussar who rushed upeadlong to the horse. "Walk him up and down, my dear fellow," heontinued, with that gay brotherly cordiality which goodheartedoung people show to everyone when they are happy.
	"Yes, your excellency," answered the Ukrainian gaily, tossing hisead.
	"Mind, walk him up and down well!"
	Another hussar also rushed toward the horse, but Bondarenko hadlready thrown the reins of the snaffle bridle over the horse'sead. It was evident that the cadet was liberal with his tips and thatt paid to serve him. Rostov patted the horse's neck and then hislank, and lingered for a moment.
	"Splendid! What a horse he will be!" he thought with a smile, andolding up his saber, his spurs jingling, he ran up the steps of theorch. His landlord, who in a waistcoat and a pointed cap, pitchforkn hand, was clearing manure from the cowhouse, looked out, and hisace immediately brightened on seeing Rostov. "Schon gut Morgen! Schonut Morgen!"* he said winking with a merry smile, evidently pleased toreet the young man.
	*"A very good morning! A very good morning!"
	"Schon fleissig?"* said Rostov with the same gay brotherly smilehich did not leave his eager face. "Hoch Oestreicher! Hoch Russen!aiser Alexander hoch!"*[2] said he, quoting words often repeated byhe German landlord.
	*"Busy already?"
	*[2] "Hurrah for the Austrians! Hurrah for the Russians! Hurrahor Emperor Alexander!"
	The German laughed, came out of the cowshed, pulled off his cap, andaving it above his head cried:
	"Und die ganze Welt hoch!"*
	*"And hurrah for the whole world!"
	Rostov waved his cap above his head like the German and ctiedaughing, "Und vivat die ganze Welt!" Though neither the Germanleaning his cowshed nor Rostov back with his platoon from foragingor hay had any reason for rejoicing, they looked at each other withoyful delight and brotherly love, wagged their heads in token ofheir mutual affection, and parted smiling, the German returning tois cowshed and Rostov going to the cottage he occupied with Denisov.
	"What about your master?" he asked Lavrushka, Denisov's orderly,hom all the regiment knew for a rogue.
	"Hasn't been in since the evening. Must have been losing,"nswered Lavrushka. "I know by now, if he wins he comes back earlyo brag about it, but if he stays out till morning it means he'sost and will come back in a rage. Will you have coffee?"
	"Yes, bring some."
	Ten minutes later Lavrushka brought the coffee. "He's coming!"aid he. "Now for trouble!" Rostov looked out of the window and sawenisov coming home. Denisov was a small man with a red face,parkling black eyes, and black tousled mustache and hair. He woren unfastened cloak, wide breeches hanging down in creases, and arumpled shako on the back of his head. He came up to the porchloomily, hanging his head.
	"Lavwuska!" he shouted loudly and angrily, "take it off, blockhead!"
	"Well, I am taking it off," replied Lavrushka's voice.
	"Ah, you're up already," said Denisov, entering the room.
	"Long ago," answered Rostov, "I have already been for the hay, andave seen Fraulein Mathilde."
	"Weally! And I've been losing, bwother. I lost yesterday like aamned fool!" cried Denisov, not pronouncing his r's. "Such illuck! Such ill luck. As soon as you left, it began and went on.ullo there! Tea!"
	Puckering up his face though smiling, and showing his short strongeeth, he began with stubby fingers of both hands to ruffle up hishick tangled black hair.
	"And what devil made me go to that wat?" (an officer nicknamedthe rat") he said, rubbing his forehead and whole face with bothands. "Just fancy, he didn't let me win a single cahd, not one cahd."
	He took the lighted pipe that was offered to him, gripped it inis fist, and tapped it on the floor, making the sparks fly, whilee continued to shout.
	"He lets one win the singles and collahs it as soon as one doublest; gives the singles and snatches the doubles!"
	He scattered the burning tobacco, smashed the pipe, and threw itway. Then he remained silent for a while, and all at once lookedheerfully with his glittering, black eyes at Rostov.
	"If at least we had some women here; but there's nothing foh oneo do but dwink. If we could only get to fighting soon. Hullo, who'shere?" he said, turning to the door as he heard a tread of heavyoots and the clinking of spurs that came to a stop, and aespectful cough.
	"The squadron quartermaster!" said Lavrushka.
	Denisov's face puckered still more.
	"Wetched!" he muttered, throwing down a purse with some gold int. "Wostov, deah fellow, just see how much there is left and shovehe purse undah the pillow," he said, and went out to theuartermaster.
	Rostov took the money and, mechanically arranging the old and newoins in separate piles, began counting them.
	"Ah! Telyanin! How d'ye do? They plucked me last night," cameenisov's voice from the next room.
	"Where? At Bykov's, at the rat's... I knew it," replied a pipingoice, and Lieutenant Telyanin, a small officer of the samequadron, entered the room.
	Rostov thrust the purse under the pillow and shook the damp littleand which was offered him. Telyanin for some reason had beenransferred from the Guards just before this campaign. He behaved veryell in the regiment but was not liked; Rostov especially detested himnd was unable to overcome or conceal his groundless antipathy tohe man.
	"Well, young cavalryman, how is my Rook behaving?" he asked. (Rookas a young horse Telyanin had sold to Rostov.)
	The lieutenant never looked the man he was speaking to straight inhe face; his eyes continually wandered from one object to another.
	"I saw you riding this morning..." he added.
	"Oh, he's all right, a good horse," answered Rostov, though theorse for which he had paid seven hundred rubbles was not worth halfhat sum. "He's begun to go a little lame on the left foreleg," hedded.
	"The hoof's cracked! That's nothing. I'll teach you what to do andhow you what kind of rivet to use."
	"Yes, please do," said Rostov.
	"I'll show you, I'll show you! It's not a secret. And it's a horseou'll thank me for."
	"Then I'll have it brought round," said Rostov wishing to avoidelyanin, and he went out to give the order.
	In the passage Denisov, with a pipe, was squatting on thehreshold facing the quartermaster who was reporting to him. On seeingostov, Denisov screwed up his face and pointing over his shoulderith his thumb to the room where Telyanin was sitting, he frownednd gave a shudder of disgust.
	"Ugh! I don't like that fellow"' he said, regardless of theuartermaster's presence.
	Rostov shrugged his shoulders as much as to say: "Nor do I, buthat's one to do?" and, having given his order, he returned toelyanin.
	Telyanin was sitting in the same indolent pose in which Rostov hadeft him, rubbing his small white hands.
	"Well there certainly are disgusting people," thought Rostov as hentered.
	"Have you told them to bring the horse?" asked Telyanin, gettingp and looking carelessly about him.
	"I have."
	"Let us go ourselves. I only came round to ask Denisov aboutesterday's order. Have you got it, Denisov?"
	"Not yet. But where are you off to?"
	"I want to teach this young man how to shoe a horse," said Telyanin.
	They went through the porch and into the stable. The lieutenantxplained how to rivet the hoof and went away to his own quarters.
	When Rostov went back there was a bottle of vodka and a sausage onhe table. Denisov was sitting there scratching with his pen on aheet of paper. He looked gloomily in Rostov's face and said: "I amiting to her."
	He leaned his elbows on the table with his pen in his hand and,vidently glad of a chance to say quicker in words what he wanted torite, told Rostov the contents of his letter.
	"You see, my fwiend," he said, "we sleep when we don't love. Were childwen of the dust... but one falls in love and one is a God,ne is pua' as on the first day of cweation... Who's that now? Sendim to the devil, I'm busy!" he shouted to Lavrushka, who went up toim not in the least abashed.
	"Who should it be? You yourself told him to come. It's theuartermaster for the money."
	Denisov frowned and was about to shout some reply but stopped.
	"Wetched business," he muttered to himself. "How much is left in theuhse?" he asked, turning to Rostov.
	"Seven new and three old imperials."
	"Oh, it's wetched! Well, what are you standing there for, youca'cwow? Call the quahtehmasteh," he shouted to Lavrushka.
	"Please, Denisov, let me lend you some: I have some, you know," saidostov, blushing.
	"Don't like bowwowing from my own fellows, I don't," growledenisov.
	"But if you won't accept money from me like a comrade, you willffend me. Really I have some," Rostov repeated.
	"No, I tell you."
	And Denisov went to the bed to get the purse from under the pillow.
	"Where have you put it, Wostov?"
	"Under the lower pillow."
	"It's not there."
	Denisov threw both pillows on the floor. The purse was not there.
	"That's a miwacle."
	"Wait, haven't you dropped it?" said Rostov, picking up theillows one at a time and shaking them.
	He pulled off the quilt and shook it. The purse was not there.
	"Dear me, can I have forgotten? No, I remember thinking that youept it under your head like a treasure," said Rostov. "I put itust here. Where is it?" he asked, turning to Lavrushka.
	"I haven't been in the room. It must be where you put it."
	"But it isn't?..."
	"You're always like that; you thwow a thing down anywhere and forgett. Feel in your pockets."
	"No, if I hadn't thought of it being a treasure," said Rostov,but I remember putting it there."
	Lavrushka turned all the bedding over, looked under the bed andnder the table, searched everywhere, and stood still in the middle ofhe room. Denisov silently watched Lavrushka's movements, and when theatter threw up his arms in surprise saying it was nowhere to be foundenisov glanced at Rostov.
	"Wostov, you've not been playing schoolboy twicks..."
	Rostov felt Denisov's gaze fixed on him, raised his eyes, andnstantly dropped them again. All the blood which had seemed congestedomewhere below his throat rushed to his face and eyes. He could notraw breath.
	"And there hasn't been anyone in the room except the lieutenantnd yourselves. It must be here somewhere," said Lavrushka.
	"Now then, you devil's puppet, look alive and hunt for it!"houted Denisov, suddenly, turning purple and rushing at the manith a threatening gesture. "If the purse isn't found I'll flog you,'ll flog you all."
	Rostov, his eyes avoiding Denisov, began buttoning his coat, buckledn his saber, and put on his cap.
	"I must have that purse, I tell you," shouted Denisov, shaking hisrderly by the shoulders and knocking him against the wall.
	"Denisov, let him alone, I know who has taken it," said Rostov,oing toward the door without raising his eyes. Denisov paused,hought a moment, and, evidently understanding what Rostov hintedt, seized his arm.
	"Nonsense!" he cried, and the veins on his forehead and neck stoodut like cords. "You are mad, I tell you. I won't allow it. Theurse is here! I'll flay this scoundwel alive, and it will be found."
	"I know who has taken it," repeated Rostov in an unsteady voice, andent to the door.
	"And I tell you, don't you dahe to do it!" shouted Denisov,ushing at the cadet to restrain him.
	But Rostov pulled away his arm and, with as much anger as thoughenisov were his worst enemy, firmly fixed his eyes directly on hisace.
	"Do you understand what you're saying?" he said in a tremblingoice. "There was no one else in the room except myself. So that if its not so, then..."
	He could not finish, and ran out of the room.
	"Ah, may the devil take you and evewybody," were the last wordsostov heard.
	Rostov went to Telyanin's quarters.
	"The master is not in, he's gone to headquarters," said Telyanin'srderly. "Has something happened?" he added, surprised at theadet's troubled face.
	"No, nothing."
	"You've only just missed him," said the orderly.
	The headquarters were situated two miles away from Salzeneck, andostov, without returning home, took a horse and rode there. There wasn inn in the village which the officers frequented. Rostov rode up tot and saw Telyanin's horse at the porch.
	In the second room of the inn the lieutenant was sitting over a dishf sausages and a bottle of wine.
	"Ah, you've come here too, young man!" he said, smiling andaising his eyebrows.
	"Yes," said Rostov as if it cost him a great deal to utter the word;nd he sat down at the nearest table.
	Both were silent. There were two Germans and a Russian officer inhe room. No one spoke and the only sounds heard were the clatter ofnives and the munching of the lieutenant.
	When Telyanin had finished his lunch he took out of his pocket aouble purse and, drawing its rings aside with his small, white,urned-up fingers, drew out a gold imperial, and lifting hisyebrows gave it to the waiter.
	"Please be quick," he said.
	The coin was a new one. Rostov rose and went up to Telyanin.
	"Allow me to look at your purse," he said in a low, almostnaudible, voice.
	With shifting eyes but eyebrows still raised, Telyanin handed himhe purse.
	"Yes, it's a nice purse. Yes, yes," he said, growing suddenlyale, and added, "Look at it, young man."
	Rostov took the purse in his hand, examined it and the money int, and looked at Telyanin. The lieutenant was looking about in hissual way and suddenly seemed to grow very merry.
	"If we get to Vienna I'll get rid of it there but in theseretched little towns there's nowhere to spend it," said he. "Well,et me have it, young man, I'm going."
	Rostov did not speak.
	"And you? Are you going to have lunch too? They feed you quiteecently here," continued Telyanin. "Now then, let me have it."
	He stretched out his hand to take hold of the purse. Rostov let gof it. Telyanin took the purse and began carelessly slipping it intohe pocket of his riding breeches, with his eyebrows lifted and hisouth slightly open, as if to say, "Yes, yes, I am putting my purse iny pocket and that's quite simple and is no else's business."
	"Well, young man?" he said with a sigh, and from under his liftedrows he glanced into Rostov's eyes.
	Some flash as of an electric spark shot from Telyanin's eyes toostov's and back, and back again and again in an instant.
	"Come here," said Rostov, catching hold of Telyanin's arm and almostragging him to the window. "That money is Denisov's; you tookt..." he whispered just above Telyanin's ear.
	"What? What? How dare you? What?" said Telyanin.
	But these words came like a piteous, despairing cry and anntreaty for pardon. As soon as Rostov heard them, an enormous load ofoubt fell from him. He was glad, and at the same instant began toity the miserable man who stood before him, but the task he had begunad to be completed.
	"Heaven only knows what the people here may imagine," mutteredelyanin, taking up his cap and moving toward a small empty room.We must have an explanation..."
	"I know it and shall prove it," said Rostov.
	"I..."
	Every muscle of Telyanin's pale, terrified face began to quiver, hisyes still shifted from side to side but with a downward look notising to Rostov's face, and his sobs were audible.
	"Count!... Don't ruin a young fellow... here is this wretched money,ake it..." He threw it on the table. "I have an old father andother!..."
	Rostov took the money, avoiding Telyanin's eyes, and went out of theoom without a word. But at the door he stopped and then retracedis steps. "O God," he said with tears in his eyes, "how could youo it?"
	"Count..." said Telyanin drawing nearer to him.
	"Don't touch me," said Rostov, drawing back. "If you need it, takehe money," and he threw the purse to him and ran out of the inn.BK2|CH5
	CHAPTER V
	That same evening there was an animated discussion among thequadron's officers in Denisov's quarters.
	"And I tell you, Rostov, that you must apologize to the colonel!"aid a tall, grizzly-haired staff captain, with enormous mustaches andany wrinkles on his large features, to Rostov who was crimson withxcitement.
	The staff captain, Kirsten, had twice been reduced to the ranksor affairs of honor and had twice regained his commission.
	"I will allow no one to call me a liar!" cried Rostov. "He told me Iied, and I told him he lied. And there it rests. He may keep me onuty every day, or may place me under arrest, but no one can make mepologize, because if he, as commander of this regiment, thinks iteneath his dignity to give me satisfaction, then..."
	"You just wait a moment, my dear fellow, and listen," interruptedhe staff captain in his deep bass, calmly stroking his long mustache.You tell the colonel in the presence of other officers that anfficer has stolen..."
	"I'm not to blame that the conversation began in the presence ofther officers. Perhaps I ought not to have spoken before them, but am not a diplomatist. That's why I joined the hussars, thinking thatere one would not need finesse; and he tells me that I am lying- soet him give me satisfaction..."
	"That's all right. No one thinks you a coward, but that's not theoint. Ask Denisov whether it is not out of the question for a cadeto demand satisfaction of his regimental commander?"
	Denisov sat gloomily biting his mustache and listening to theonversation, evidently with no wish to take part in it. He answeredhe staff captain's question by a disapproving shake of his head.
	"You speak to the colonel about this nasty business before otherfficers," continued the staff captain, "and Bogdanich" (the colonelas called Bogdanich) "shuts you up."
	"He did not shut me up, he said I was telling an untruth."
	"Well, have it so, and you talked a lot of nonsense to him andust apologize."
	"Not on any account!" exclaimed Rostov.
	"I did not expect this of you," said the staff captain seriously andeverely. "You don't wish to apologize, but, man, it's not only to himut to the whole regiment- all of us- you're to blame all round. Thease is this: you ought to have thought the matter over and takendvice; but no, you go and blurt it all straight out before thefficers. Now what was the colonel to do? Have the officer tried andisgrace the whole regiment? Disgrace the whole regiment because ofne scoundrel? Is that how you look at it? We don't see it likehat. And Bogdanich was a brick: he told you you were saying whatas not true. It's not pleasant, but what's to be done, my dearellow? You landed yourself in it. And now, when one wants to smoothhe thing over, some conceit prevents your apologizing, and you wisho make the whole affair public. You are offended at being put on duty bit, but why not apologize to an old and honorable officer? Whateverogdanich may be, anyway he is an honorable and brave old colonel!ou're quick at taking offense, but you don't mind disgracing thehole regiment!" The staff captain's voice began to tremble. "You haveeen in the regiment next to no time, my lad, you're here today andomorrow you'll be appointed adjutant somewhere and can snap youringers when it is said 'There are thieves among the Pavlogradfficers!' But it's not all the same to us! Am I not right, Denisov?t's not the same!"
	Denisov remained silent and did not move, but occasionally lookedith his glittering black eyes at Rostov.
	"You value your own pride and don't wish to apologize," continuedhe staff captain, "but we old fellows, who have grown up in and,od willing, are going to die in the regiment, we prize the honor ofhe regiment, and Bogdanich knows it. Oh, we do prize it, oldellow! And all this is not right, it's not right! You may takeffense or not but I always stick to mother truth. It's not right!"
	And the staff captain rose and turned away from Rostov.
	"That's twue, devil take it" shouted Denisov, jumping up. "Now then,ostov, now then!"
	 Rostov, growing red and pale alternately, looked first at onefficer and then at the other.
	"No, gentlemen, no... you mustn't think... I quite understand.ou're wrong to think that of me... I... for me... for the honor ofhe regiment I'd... Ah well, I'll show that in action, and for mehe honor of the flag... Well, never mind, it's true I'm to blame,o blame all round. Well, what else do you want?..."
	"Come, that's right, Count!" cried the staff captain, turningound and clapping Rostov on the shoulder with his big hand.
	"I tell you," shouted Denisov, "he's a fine fellow."
	"That's better, Count," said the staff captain, beginning to addressostov by his title, as if in recognition of his confession. "Go andpologize, your excellency. Yes, go!"
	"Gentlemen, I'll do anything. No one shall hear a word from me,"aid Rostov in an imploring voice, "but I can't apologize, by God Ian't, do what you will! How can I go and apologize like a littleoy asking forgiveness?"
	Denisov began to laugh.
	"It'll be worse for you. Bogdanich is vindictive and you'll payor your obstinacy," said Kirsten.
	"No, on my word it's not obstinacy! I can't describe the feeling. can't..."
	"Well, it's as you like," said the staff captain. "And what hasecome of that scoundrel?" he asked Denisov.
	"He has weported himself sick, he's to be stwuck off the listomowwow," muttered Denisov.
	"It is an illness, there's no other way of explaining it," saidhe staff captain.
	"Illness or not, he'd better not cwoss my path. I'd kill him!"houted Denisov in a bloodthirsty tone.
	Just then Zherkov entered the room.
	"What brings you here?" cried the officers turning to the newcomer.
	"We're to go into action, gentlemen! Mack has surrendered with hishole army."
	"It's not true!"
	"I've seen him myself!"
	"What? Saw the real Mack? With hands and feet?"
	"Into action! Into action! Bring him a bottle for such news! But howid you come here?"
	"I've been sent back to the regiment all on account of that devil,ack. An Austrian general complained of me. I congratulated him onack's arrival... What's the matter, Rostov? You look as if you'd justome out of a hot bath."
	"Oh, my dear fellow, we're in such a stew here these last two days."
	The regimental adjutant came in and confirmed the news brought byherkov. They were under orders to advance next day.
	"We're going into action, gentlemen!"
	"Well, thank God! We've been sitting here too long!"BK2|CH6
	CHAPTER VI
	Kutuzov fell back toward Vienna, destroying behind him the bridgesver the rivers Inn (at Braunau) and Traun (near Linz). On October3 the Russian troops were crossing the river Enns. At midday theussian baggage train, the artillery, and columns of troops wereefiling through the town of Enns on both sides of the bridge.
	It was a warm, rainy, autumnal day. The wide expanse that opened outefore the heights on which the Russian batteries stood guarding theridge was at times veiled by a diaphanous curtain of slanting rain,nd then, suddenly spread out in the sunlight, far-distant objectsould be clearly seen glittering as though freshly varnished. Downelow, the little town could be seen with its white, red-roofedouses, its cathedral, and its bridge, on both sides of which streamedostling masses of Russian troops. At the bend of the Danube, vessels,n island, and a castle with a park surrounded by the waters of theonfluence of the Enns and the Danube became visible, and the rockyeft bank of the Danube covered with pine forests, with a mysticackground of green treetops and bluish gorges. The turrets of aonvent stood out beyond a wild virgin pine forest, and far away onhe other side of the Enns the enemy's horse patrols could beiscerned.
	Among the field guns on the brow of the hill the general inommand of the rearguard stood with a staff officer, scanning theountry through his fieldglass. A little behind them Nesvitski, whoad been sent to the rearguard by the commander in chief, wasitting on the trail of a gun carriage. A Cossack who accompaniedim had handed him a knapsack and a flask, and Nesvitski wasreating some officers to pies and real doppelkummel. The officersladly gathered round him, some on their knees, some squatting Turkishashion on the wet grass.
	"Yes, the Austrian prince who built that castle was no fool. It's fine place! Why are you not eating anything, gentlemen?" Nesvitskias saying.
	"Thank you very much, Prince," answered one of the officers, pleasedo be talking to a staff officer of such importance. "It's a lovelylace! We passed close to the park and saw two deer... and what aplendid house!"
	"Look, Prince," said another, who would have dearly liked to takenother pie but felt shy, and therefore pretended to be examininghe countryside- "See, our infantrymen have already got there. Lookhere in the meadow behind the village, three of them are draggingomething. They'll ransack that castle," he remarked with evidentpproval.
	"So they will," said Nesvitski. "No, but what I should like,"dded he, munching a pie in his moist-lipped handsome mouth, "would beo slip in over there."
	He pointed with a smile to a turreted nunnery, and his eyes narrowednd gleamed.
	"That would be fine, gentlemen!"
	The officers laughed.
	"Just to flutter the nuns a bit. They say there are Italian girlsmong them. On my word I'd give five years of my life for it!"
	"They must be feeling dull, too," said one of the bolder officers,aughing.
	Meanwhile the staff officer standing in front pointed outomething to the general, who looked through his field glass.
	"Yes, so it is, so it is," said the general angrily, lowering theield glass and shrugging his shoulders, "so it is! They'll be firedn at the crossing. And why are they dawdling there?"
	On the opposite side the enemy could be seen by the naked eye, androm their battery a milk-white cloud arose. Then came the distanteport of a shot, and our troops could be seen hurrying to therossing.
	Nesvitski rose, puffing, and went up to the general, smiling.
	"Would not your excellency like a little refreshment?" he said.
	"It's a bad business," said the general without answering him,our men have been wasting time."
	"Hadn't I better ride over, your excellency?" asked Nesvitski.
	"Yes, please do," answered the general, and he repeated the orderhat had already once been given in detail: "and tell the hussars thathey are to cross last and to fire the bridge as I ordered; and thenflammable material on the bridge must be reinspected."
	"Very good," answered Nesvitski.
	He called the Cossack with his horse, told him to put away thenapsack and flask, and swung his heavy person easily into the saddle.
	"I'll really call in on the nuns," he said to the officers whoatched him smilingly, and he rode off by the winding path down theill.
	"Now then, let's see how far it will carry, Captain. Just try!" saidhe general, turning to an artillery officer. "Have a little fun toass the time."
	"Crew, to your guns!" commanded the officer.
	In a moment the men came running gaily from their campfires andegan loading.
	"One!" came the command.
	Number one jumped briskly aside. The gun rang out with a deafeningetallic roar, and a whistling grenade flew above the heads of ourroops below the hill and fell far short of the enemy, a littlemoke showing the spot where it burst.
	The faces of officers and men brightened up at the sound. Everyoneot up and began watching the movements of our troops below, aslainly visible as if but a stone's throw away, and the movements ofhe approaching enemy farther off. At the same instant the sun cameully out from behind the clouds, and the clear sound of theolitary shot and the brilliance of the bright sunshine merged in aingle joyous and spirited impression.BK2|CH7
	CHAPTER VII
	Two of the enemy's shots had already flown across the bridge,here there was a crush. Halfway across stood Prince Nesvitski, whoad alighted from his horse and whose big body was body was jammedgainst the railings. He looked back laughing to the Cossack who stood few steps behind him holding two horses by their bridles. Eachime Prince Nesvitski tried to move on, soldiers and carts pushedim back again and pressed him against the railings, and all heould do was to smile.
	"What a fine fellow you are, friend!" said the Cossack to a convoyoldier with a wagon, who was pressing onto the infantrymen who wererowded together close to his wheels and his horses. "What a fellow!ou can't wait a moment! Don't you see the general wants to pass?"
	But the convoyman took no notice of the word "general" and shoutedt the soldiers who were blocking his way. "Hi there, boys! Keep tohe left! Wait a bit." But the soldiers, crowded together shouldero shoulder, their bayonets interlocking, moved over the bridge in aense mass. Looking down over the rails Prince Nesvitski saw theapid, noisy little waves of the Enns, which rippling and eddyingound the piles of the bridge chased each other along. Looking onhe bridge he saw equally uniform living waves of soldiers, shouldertraps, covered shakos, knapsacks, bayonets, long muskets, and,nder the shakos, faces with broad cheekbones, sunken cheeks, andistless tired expressions, and feet that moved through the sticky mudhat covered the planks of the bridge. Sometimes through theonotonous waves of men, like a fleck of white foam on the waves ofhe Enns, an officer, in a cloak and with a type of face differentrom that of the men, squeezed his way along; sometimes like a chip ofood whirling in the river, an hussar on foot, an orderly, or aownsman was carried through the waves of infantry; and sometimes like log floating down the river, an officers' or company's baggageagon, piled high, leather covered, and hemmed in on all sides,oved across the bridge.
	"It's as if a dam had burst," said the Cossack hopelessly. "Arehere many more of you to come?"
	"A million all but one!" replied a waggish soldier in a torn coat,ith a wink, and passed on followed by another, an old man.
	"If he" (he meant the enemy) "begins popping at the bridge now,"aid the old soldier dismally to a comrade, "you'll forget tocratch yourself."
	That soldier passed on, and after him came another sitting on aart.
	"Where the devil have the leg bands been shoved to?" said anrderly, running behind the cart and fumbling in the back of it.
	And he also passed on with the wagon. Then came some merryoldiers who had evidently been drinking.
	"And then, old fellow, he gives him one in the teeth with the buttnd of his gun..." a soldier whose greatcoat was well tucked up saidaily, with a wide swing of his arm.
	"Yes, the ham was just delicious..." answered another with a loudaugh. And they, too, passed on, so that Nesvitski did not learn whoad been struck on the teeth, or what the ham had to do with it.
	"Bah! How they scurry. He just sends a ball and they think they'llll be killed," a sergeant was saying angrily and reproachfully.
	"As it flies past me, Daddy, the ball I mean," said a youngoldier with an enormous mouth, hardly refraining from laughing, "Ielt like dying of fright. I did, 'pon my word, I got thatrightened!" said he, as if bragging of having been frightened.
	That one also passed. Then followed a cart unlike any that hadone before. It was a German cart with a pair of horses led by aerman, and seemed loaded with a whole houseful of effects. A finerindled cow with a large udder was attached to the cart behind. Aoman with an unweaned baby, an old woman, and a healthy German girlith bright red cheeks were sitting on some feather beds. Evidentlyhese fugitives were allowed to pass by special permission. The eyesf all the soldiers turned toward the women, and while the vehicle wasassing at foot pace all the soldiers' remarks related to the twooung ones. Every face bore almost the same smile, expressing unseemlyhoughts about the women.
	"Just see, the German sausage is making tracks, too!"
	"Sell me the missis," said another soldier, addressing the German,ho, angry and frightened, strode energetically along with downcastyes.
	"See how smart she's made herself! Oh, the devils!"
	"There, Fedotov, you should be quartered on them!"
	"I have seen as much before now, mate!"
	"Where are you going?" asked an infantry officer who was eating anpple, also half smiling as he looked at the handsome girl.
	The German closed his eyes, signifying that he did not understand.
	"Take it if you like," said the officer, giving the girl an apple.
	The girl smiled and took it. Nesvitski like the rest of the men onhe bridge did not take his eyes off the women till they had passed.hen they had gone by, the same stream of soldiers followed, withhe same kind of talk, and at last all stopped. As often happens,he horses of a convoy wagon became restive at the end of theridge, and the whole crowd had to wait.
	"And why are they stopping? There's no proper order!" said theoldiers. "Where are you shoving to? Devil take you! Can't you wait?t'll be worse if he fires the bridge. See, here's an officer jammedn too"- different voices were saying in the crowd, as the menooked at one another, and all pressed toward the exit from theridge.
	Looking down at the waters of the Enns under the bridge, Nesvitskiuddenly heard a sound new to him, of something swiftly approaching...omething big, that splashed into the water.
	"Just see where it carries to!" a soldier near by said sternly,ooking round at the sound.
	"Encouraging us to get along quicker," said another uneasily.
	The crowd moved on again. Nesvitski realized that it was a cannonall.
	"Hey, Cossack, my horse!" he said. "Now, then, you there! get out ofhe way! Make way!"
	With great difficulty he managed to get to his horse, and shoutingontinually he moved on. The soldiers squeezed themselves to makeay for him, but again pressed on him so that they jammed his leg, andhose nearest him were not to blame for they were themselves pressedtill harder from behind.
	"Nesvitski, Nesvitski! you numskull!" came a hoarse voice fromehind him.
	Nesvitski looked round and saw, some fifteen paces away buteparated by the living mass of moving infantry, Vaska Denisov, rednd shaggy, with his cap on the back of his black head and a cloakanging jauntily over his shoulder.
	"Tell these devils, these fiends, to let me pass!" shouted Denisovvidently in a fit of rage, his coal-black eyes with their bloodshothites glittering and rolling as he waved his sheathed saber in amall bare hand as red as his face.
	"Ah, Vaska!" joyfully replied Nesvitski. "What's up with you?"
	"The squadwon can't pass," shouted Vaska Denisov, showing hishite teeth fiercely and spurring his black thoroughbred Arab, whichwitched its ears as the bayonets touched it, and snorted, spurtinghite foam from his bit, tramping the planks of the bridge with hisoofs, and apparently ready to jump over the railings had his rideret him. "What is this? They're like sheep! Just like sheep! Out ofhe way!... Let us pass!... Stop there, you devil with the cart!'ll hack you with my saber!" he shouted, actually drawing his saberrom its scabbard and flourishing it
	The soldiers crowded against one another with terrified faces, andenisov joined Nesvitski.
	"How's it you're not drunk today?" said Nesvitski when the other hadidden up to him.
	"They don't even give one time to dwink!" answered Vaska Denisov.They keep dwagging the wegiment to and fwo all day. If they mean toight, let's fight. But the devil knows what this is."
	"What a dandy you are today!" said Nesvitski, looking at Denisov'sew cloak and saddlecloth.
	Denisov smiled, took out of his sabretache a handkerchief thatiffused a smell of perfume, and put it to Nesvitski's nose.
	"Of course. I'm going into action! I've shaved, bwushed my teeth,nd scented myself."
	The imposing figure of Nesvitski followed by his Cossack, and theetermination of Denisov who flourished his sword and shoutedrantically, had such an effect that they managed to squeeze througho the farther side of the bridge and stopped the infantry. Beside theridge Nesvitski found the colonel to whom he had to deliver therder, and having done this he rode back.
	Having cleared the way Denisov stopped at the end of the bridge.arelessly holding in his stallion that was neighing and pawing theround, eager to rejoin its fellows, he watched his squadron drawearer. Then the clang of hoofs, as of several horses galloping,esounded on the planks of the bridge, and the squadron, officers inront and men four abreast, spread across the bridge and began tomerge on his side of it.
	The infantry who had been stopped crowded near the bridge in therampled mud and gazed with that particular feeling of ill-will,strangement, and ridicule with which troops of different arms usuallyncounter one another at the clean, smart hussars who moved pasthem in regular order.
	"Smart lads! Only fit for a fair!" said one.
	"What good are they? They're led about just for show!" remarkednother.
	"Don't kick up the dust, you infantry!" jested an hussar whoserancing horse had splashed mud over some foot soldiers.
	"I'd like to put you on a two days' march with a knapsack! Your fineords would soon get a bit rubbed," said an infantryman, wiping theud off his face with his sleeve. "Perched up there, you're moreike a bird than a man."
	"There now, Zikin, they ought to put you on a horse. You'd lookine," said a corporal, chaffing a thin little soldier who bentnder the weight of his knapsack.
	"Take a stick between your legs, that'll suit you for a horse!"he hussar shouted back.BK2|CH8
	CHAPTER VIII
	The last of the infantry hurriedly crossed the bridge, squeezingogether as they approached it as if passing through a funnel. At lasthe baggage wagons had all crossed, the crush was less, and the lastattalion came onto the bridge. Only Denisov's squadron of hussarsemained on the farther side of the bridge facing the enemy, who coulde seen from the hill on the opposite bank but was not yet visiblerom the bridge, for the horizon as seen from the valley through whichhe river flowed was formed by the rising ground only half a mileway. At the foot of the hill lay wasteland over which a few groups ofur Cossack scouts were moving. Suddenly on the road at the top of theigh ground, artillery and troops in blue uniform were seen. Theseere the French. A group of Cossack scouts retired down the hill at trot. All the officers and men of Denisov's squadron, though theyried to talk of other things and to look in other directions, thoughtnly of what was there on the hilltop, and kept constantly lookingt the patches appearing on the skyline, which they knew to be thenemy's troops. The weather had cleared again since noon and the sunas descending brightly upon the Danube and the dark hills aroundt. It was calm, and at intervals the bugle calls and the shouts ofhe enemy could be heard from the hill. There was no one now betweenhe squadron and the enemy except a few scattered skirmishers. Anmpty space of some seven hundred yards was all that separated them.he enemy ceased firing, and that stern, threatening, inaccessible,nd intangible line which separates two hostile armies was all theore clearly felt.
	"One step beyond that boundary line which resembles the lineividing the living from the dead lies uncertainty, suffering, andeath. And what is there? Who is there?- there beyond that field, thatree, that roof lit up by the sun? No one knows, but one wants tonow. You fear and yet long to cross that line, and know that soonerr later it must be crossed and you will have to find out what ishere, just as you will inevitably have to learn what lies the otheride of death. But you are strong, healthy, cheerful, and excited, andre surrounded by other such excitedly animated and healthy men." Sohinks, or at any rate feels, anyone who comes in sight of thenemy, and that feeling gives a particular glamour and glad keennessf impression to everything that takes place at such moments.
	On the high ground where the enemy was, the smoke of a cannonose, and a ball flew whistling over the heads of the hussar squadron.he officers who had been standing together rode off to theirlaces. The hussars began carefully aligning their horses. Silenceell on the whole squadron. All were looking at the enemy in front andt the squadron commander, awaiting the word of command. A secondnd a third cannon ball flew past. Evidently they were firing at theussars, but the balls with rapid rhythmic whistle flew over the headsf the horsemen and fell somewhere beyond them. The hussars did notook round, but at the sound of each shot, as at the word ofommand, the whole squadron with its rows of faces so alike yet soifferent, holding its breath while the ball flew past, rose in thetirrups and sank back again. The soldiers without turning their headslanced at one another, curious to see their comrades' impression.very face, from Denisov's to that of the bugler, showed one commonxpression of conflict, irritation, and excitement, around chin andouth. The quartermaster frowned, looking at the soldiers as ifhreatening to punish them. Cadet Mironov ducked every time a balllew past. Rostov on the left flank, mounted on his Rook- a handsomeorse despite its game leg- had the happy air of a schoolboy called upefore a large audience for an examination in which he feels sure heill distinguish himself. He was glancing at everyone with a clear,right expression, as if asking them to notice how calmly he sat underire. But despite himself, on his face too that same indication ofomething new and stern showed round the mouth.
	"Who's that curtseying there? Cadet Miwonov! That's not wight!ook at me," cried Denisov who, unable to keep still on one spot, kepturning his horse in front of the squadron.
	The black, hairy, snub-nosed face of Vaska Denisov, and his wholehort sturdy figure with the sinewy hairy hand and stumpy fingers inhich he held the hilt of his naked saber, looked just as it usuallyid, especially toward evening when he had emptied his secondottle; he was only redder than usual. With his shaggy head thrownack like birds when they drink, pressing his spurs mercilessly intohe sides of his good horse, Bedouin, and sitting as though fallingackwards in the saddle, he galloped to the other flank of thequadron and shouted in a hoarse voice to the men to look to theiristols. He rode up to Kirsten. The staff captain on his broad-backed,teady mare came at a walk to meet him. His face with its longustache was serious as always, only his eyes were brighter thansual.
	"Well, what about it?" said he to Denisov. "It won't come to aight. You'll see- we shall retire."
	"The devil only knows what they're about!" muttered Denisov. "Ah,ostov," he cried noticing the cadet's bright face, "you've got itt last."
	And he smiled approvingly, evidently pleased with the cadet.ostov felt perfectly happy. Just then the commander appeared on theridge. Denisov galloped up to him.
	"Your excellency! Let us attack them! I'll dwive them off."
	"Attack indeed!" said the colonel in a bored voice, puckering up hisace as if driving off a troublesome fly. "And why are you stoppingere? Don't you see the skirmishers are retreating? Lead thequadron back."
	The squadron crossed the bridge and drew out of range of fireithout having lost a single man. The second squadron that had been inhe front line followed them across and the last Cossacks quittedhe farther side of the river.
	The two Pavlograd squadrons, having crossed the bridge, retired uphe hill one after the other. Their colonel, Karl Bogdanichchubert, came up to Denisov's squadron and rode at a footpace not farrom Rostov, without taking any notice of him although they were noweeting for the first time since their encounter concerningelyanin. Rostov, feeling that he was at the front and in the power of man toward whom he now admitted that he had been to blame, did notift his eyes from the colonel's athletic back, his nape coveredith light hair, and his red neck. It seemed to Rostov thatogdanich was only pretending not to notice him, and that his wholeim now was to test the cadet's courage, so he drew himself up andooked around him merrily; then it seemed to him that Bogdanich rodeo near in order to show him his courage. Next he thought that hisnemy would send the squadron on a desperate attack just to punishim- Rostov. Then he imagined how, after the attack, Bogdanich wouldome up to him as he lay wounded and would magnanimously extend theand of reconciliation.
	The high-shouldered figure of Zherkov, familiar to the Pavlograds ase had but recently left their regiment, rode up to the colonel. Afteris dismissal from headquarters Zherkov had not remained in theegiment, saying he was not such a fool as to slave at the fronthen he could get more rewards by doing nothing on the staff, andad succeeded in attaching himself as an orderly officer to Princeagration. He now came to his former chief with an order from theommander of the rear guard.
	"Colonel," he said, addressing Rostov's enemy with an air ofloomy gravity and glancing round at his comrades, "there is anrder to stop and fire the bridge."
	"An order to who?" asked the colonel morosely.
	"I don't myself know 'to who,'" replied the cornet in a seriousone, "but the prince told me to 'go and tell the colonel that theussars must return quickly and fire the bridge.'"
	Zherkov was followed by an officer of the suite who rode up to theolonel of hussars with the same order. After him the stoutesvitski came galloping up on a Cossack horse that could scarcelyarry his weight.
	"How's this, Colonel?" he shouted as he approached. "I told you toire the bridge, and now someone has gone and blundered; they arell beside themselves over there and one can't make anything out."
	The colonel deliberately stopped the regiment and turned toesvitski.
	"You spoke to me of inflammable material," said he, "but you saidothing about firing it."
	"But, my dear sir," said Nesvitski as he drew up, taking off his capnd smoothing his hair wet with perspiration with his plump hand,wasn't I telling you to fire the bridge, when inflammable materialad been put in position?"
	"I am not your 'dear sir,' Mr. Staff Officer, and you did not telle to burn the bridge! I know the service, and it is my habit orderstrictly to obey. You said the bridge would be burned, but who wouldt burn, I could not know by the holy spirit!"
	"Ah, that's always the way!" said Nesvitski with a wave of the hand.How did you get here?" said he, turning to Zherkov.
	"On the same business. But you are damp! Let me wring you out!"
	"You were saying, Mr. Staff Officer..." continued the colonel inn offended tone.
	"Colonel," interrupted the officer of the suite, "You must beuick or the enemy will bring up his guns to use grapeshot."
	The colonel looked silently at the officer of the suite, at thetout staff officer, and at Zherkov, and he frowned.
	"I will the bridge fire," he said in a solemn tone as if to announcehat in spite of all the unpleasantness he had to endure he wouldtill do the right thing.
	Striking his horse with his long muscular legs as if it were tolame for everything, the colonel moved forward and ordered the secondquadron, that in which Rostov was serving under Denisov, to return tohe bridge.
	"There, it's just as I thought," said Rostov to himself. "Heishes to test me!" His heart contracted and the blood rushed to hisace. "Let him see whether I am a coward!" he thought.
	Again on all the bright faces of the squadron the serious expressionppeared that they had worn when under fire. Rostov watched his enemy,he colonel, closely- to find in his face confirmation of his ownonjecture, but the colonel did not once glance at Rostov, andooked as he always did when at the front, solemn and stern. Then camehe word of command.
	"Look sharp! Look sharp!" several voices repeated around him.
	Their sabers catching in the bridles and their spurs jingling, theussars hastily dismounted, not knowing what they were to do. Theen were crossing themselves. Rostov no longer looked at theolonel, he had no time. He was afraid of falling behind theussars, so much afraid that his heart stood still. His handrembled as he gave his horse into an orderly's charge, and he felthe blood rush to his heart with a thud. Denisov rode past him,eaning back and shouting something. Rostov saw nothing but theussars running all around him, their spurs catching and theirabers clattering.
	"Stretchers!" shouted someone behind him.
	Rostov did not think what this call for stretchers meant; he ran on,rying only to be ahead of the others; but just at the bridge, notooking at the ground, he came on some sticky, trodden mud,tumbled, and fell on his hands. The others outstripped him.
	"At boss zides, Captain," he heard the voice of the colonel, who,aving ridden ahead, had pulled up his horse near the bridge, with ariumphant, cheerful face.
	Rostov wiping his muddy hands on his breeches looked at his enemynd was about to run on, thinking that the farther he went to theront the better. But Bogdanich, without looking at or recognizingostov, shouted to him:
	"Who's that running on the middle of the bridge? To the right!ome back, Cadet!" he cried angrily; and turning to Denisov, who,howing off his courage, had ridden on to the planks of the bridge:
	"Why run risks, Captain? You should dismount," he said.
	"Oh, every bullet has its billet," answered Vaska Denisov, turningn his saddle.
	Meanwhile Nesvitski, Zherkov, and the officer of the suite weretanding together out of range of the shots, watching, now the smallroup of men with yellow shakos, dark-green jackets braided with cord,nd blue riding breeches, who were swarming near the bridge, andhen at what was approaching in the distance from the opposite side-he blue uniforms and groups with horses, easily recognizable asrtillery.
	"Will they burn the bridge or not? Who'll get there first? Will theyet there and fire the bridge or will the French get withinrapeshot range and wipe them out?" These were the questions eachan of the troops on the high ground above the bridge involuntarilysked himself with a sinking heart- watching the bridge and theussars in the bright evening light and the blue tunics advancing fromhe other side with their bayonets and guns.
	"Ugh. The hussars will get it hot!" said Nesvitski; "they are withinrapeshot range now."
	"He shouldn't have taken so many men," said the officer of theuite.
	"True enough," answered Nesvitski; "two smart fellows could haveone the job just as well."
	"Ah, your excellency," put in Zherkov, his eyes fixed on theussars, but still with that naive air that made it impossible to knowhether he was speaking in jest or in earnest. "Ah, your excellency!ow you look at things! Send two men? And who then would give us theladimir medal and ribbon? But now, even if they do get peppered,he squadron may be recommended for honors and he may get a ribbon.ur Bogdanich knows how things are done."
	"There now!" said the officer of the suite, "that's grapeshot."
	He pointed to the French guns, the limbers of which were beingetached and hurriedly removed.
	On the French side, amid the groups with cannon, a cloud of smokeppeared, then a second and a third almost simultaneously, and athe moment when the first report was heard a fourth was seen. Then twoeports one after another, and a third.
	"Oh! Oh!" groaned Nesvitski as if in fierce pain, seizing thefficer of the suite by the arm. "Look! A man has fallen! Fallen,allen!"
	"Two, I think."
	"If I were Tsar I would never go to war," said Nesvitski, turningway.
	The French guns were hastily reloaded. The infantry in their blueniforms advanced toward the bridge at a run. Smoke appeared again butt irregular intervals, and grapeshot cracked and rattled onto theridge. But this time Nesvitski could not see what was happeninghere, as a dense cloud of smoke arose from it. The hussars haducceeded in setting it on fire and the French batteries were nowiring at them, no longer to hinder them but because the guns wererained and there was someone to fire at.
	The French had time to fire three rounds of grapeshot before theussars got back to their horses. Two were misdirected and the shotent too high, but the last round fell in the midst of a group ofussars and knocked three of them over.
	Rostov, absorbed by his relations with Bogdanich, had paused onhe bridge not knowing what to do. There was no one to hew down (as head always imagined battles to himself), nor could he help to fire theridge because he had not brought any burning straw with him likehe other soldiers. He stood looking about him, when suddenly he heard rattle on the bridge as if nuts were being spilt, and the hussarearest to him fell against the rails with a groan. Rostov ran up toim with the others. Again someone shouted, "Stretchers!" Four meneized the hussar and began lifting him.
	"Oooh! For Christ's sake let me alone!" cried the wounded man, buttill he was lifted and laid on the stretcher.
	Nicholas Rostov turned away and, as if searching for something,azed into the distance, at the waters of the Danube, at the sky,nd at the sun. How beautiful the sky looked; how blue, how calm,nd how deep! How bright and glorious was the setting sun! With whatoft glitter the waters of the distant Danube shone. And fairertill were the faraway blue mountains beyond the river, the nunnery,he mysterious gorges, and the pine forests veiled in the mist ofheir summits... There was peace and happiness... "I should wishingor nothing else, nothing, if only I were there," thought Rostov.In myself alone and in that sunshine there is so much happiness;ut here... groans, suffering, fear, and this uncertainty and hurry...here- they are shouting again, and again are all running backomewhere, and I shall run with them, and it, death, is here abovee and around... Another instant and I shall never again see theun, this water, that gorge!..."
	At that instant the sun began to hide behind the clouds, and othertretchers came into view before Rostov. And the fear of death andf the stretchers, and love of the sun and of life, all merged intone feeling of sickening agitation.
	"O Lord God! Thou who art in that heaven, save, forgive, and protecte!" Rostov whispered.
	The hussars ran back to the men who held their horses; theiroices sounded louder and calmer, the stretchers disappeared fromight.
	"Well, fwiend? So you've smelt powdah!" shouted Vaska Denisov justbove his ear.
	"It's all over; but I am a coward- yes, a coward!" thought Rostov,nd sighing deeply he took Rook, his horse, which stood resting oneoot, from the orderly and began to mount.
	"Was that grapeshot?" he asked Denisov.
	"Yes and no mistake!" cried Denisov. "You worked like wegular bwicksnd it's nasty work! An attack's pleasant work! Hacking away at theogs! But this sort of thing is the very devil, with them shootingt you like a target."
	And Denisov rode up to a group that had stopped near Rostov,omposed of the colonel, Nesvitski, Zherkov, and the officer fromhe suite.
	"Well, it seems that no one has noticed," thought Rostov. And thisas true. No one had taken any notice, for everyone knew the sensationhich the cadet under fire for the first time had experienced.
	"Here's something for you to report," said Zherkov. "See if Ion't get promoted to a sublieutenancy."
	"Inform the prince that I the bridge fired!" said the colonelriumphantly and gaily.
	"And if he asks about the losses?"
	"A trifle," said the colonel in his bass voice: "two hussarsounded, and one knocked out," he added, unable to restrain a happymile, and pronouncing the phrase "knocked out" with ringingistinctness.BK2|CH9
	CHAPTER IX
	Pursued by the French army of a hundred thousand men under theommand of Bonaparte, encountering a population that was unfriendly tot, losing confidence in its allies, suffering from shortness ofupplies, and compelled to act under conditions of war unlike anythinghat had been foreseen, the Russian army of thirty-five thousand menommanded by Kutuzov was hurriedly retreating along the Danube,topping where overtaken by the enemy and fighting rearguard actionsnly as far as necessary to enable it to retreat without losing itseavy equipment. There had been actions at Lambach, Amstetten, andelk; but despite the courage and endurance- acknowledged even byhe enemy- with which the Russians fought, the only consequence ofhese actions was a yet more rapid retreat. Austrian troops that hadscaped capture at Ulm and had joined Kutuzov at Braunau now separatedrom the Russian army, and Kutuzov was left with only his own weak andxhausted forces. The defense of Vienna was no longer to be thoughtf. Instead of an offensive, the plan of which, carefully preparedn accord with the modern science of strategics, had been handed toutuzov when he was in Vienna by the Austrian Hofkriegsrath, theole and almost unattainable aim remaining for him was to effect aunction with the forces that were advancing from Russia, withoutosing his army as Mack had done at Ulm.
	On the twenty-eighth of October Kutuzov with his army crossed to theeft bank of the Danube and took up a position for the first time withhe river between himself and the main body of the French. On thehirtieth he attacked Mortier's division, which was on the leftank, and broke it up. In this action for the first time trophies wereaken: banners, cannon, and two enemy generals. For the first time,fter a fortnight's retreat, the Russian troops had halted and after aight had not only held the field but had repulsed the French.hough the troops were ill-clad, exhausted, and had lost a third ofheir number in killed, wounded, sick, and stragglers; though a numberf sick and wounded had been abandoned on the other side of the Danubeith a letter in which Kutuzov entrusted them to the humanity of thenemy; and though the big hospitals and the houses in Kremsonverted into military hospitals could no longer accommodate allhe sick and wounded, yet the stand made at Krems and the victory overortier raised the spirits of the army considerably. Throughout thehole army and at headquarters most joyful though erroneous rumorsere rife of the imaginary approach of columns from Russia, of someictory gained by the Austrians, and of the retreat of therightened Bonaparte.
	Prince Andrew during the battle had been in attendance on theustrian General Schmidt, who was killed in the action. His horsead been wounded under him and his own arm slightly grazed by aullet. As a mark of the commander in chief's special favor he wasent with the news of this victory to the Austrian court, now noonger at Vienna (which was threatened by the French) but at Brunn.espite his apparently delicate build Prince Andrew could endurehysical fatigue far better than many very muscular men, and on theight of the battle, having arrived at Krems excited but not weary,ith dispatches from Dokhturov to Kutuzov, he was sent immediatelyith a special dispatch to Brunn. To be so sent meant not only aeward but an important step toward promotion.
	The night was dark but starry, the road showed black in the snowhat had fallen the previous day- the day of the battle. Reviewing hismpressions of the recent battle, picturing pleasantly to himselfhe impression his news of a victory would create, or recalling theend-off given him by the commander in chief and his fellowfficers, Prince Andrew was galloping along in a post chaisenjoying the feelings of a man who has at length begun to attain aong-desired happiness. As soon as he closed his eyes his earseemed filled with the rattle of the wheels and the sensation ofictory. Then he began to imagine that the Russians were runningway and that he himself was killed, but he quickly roused himselfith a feeling of joy, as if learning afresh that this was not sout that on the contrary the French had run away. He again recalledll the details of the victory and his own calm courage during theattle, and feeling reassured he dozed off.... The dark starry nightas followed by a bright cheerful morning. The snow was thawing in theunshine, the horses galloped quickly, and on both sides of the roadere forests of different kinds, fields, and villages.
	At one of the post stations he overtook a convoy of Russian wounded.he Russian officer in charge of the transport lolled back in theront cart, shouting and scolding a soldier with coarse abuse. In eachf the long German carts six or more pale, dirty, bandaged men wereeing jolted over the stony road. Some of them were talking (heeard Russian words), others were eating bread; the more severelyounded looked silently, with the languid interest of sick children,t the envoy hurrying past them.
	Prince Andrew told his driver to stop, and asked a soldier in whatction they had been wounded. "Day before yesterday, on the Danube,"nswered the soldier. Prince Andrew took out his purse and gave theoldier three gold pieces.
	"That's for them all," he said to the officer who came up.
	"Get well soon, lads!" he continued, turning to the soldiers.There's plenty to do still."
	"What news, sir?" asked the officer, evidently anxious to start aonversation.
	"Good news!... Go on!" he shouted to the driver, and they gallopedn.
	It was already quite dark when Prince Andrew rattled over theaved streets of Brunn and found himself surrounded by high buildings,he lights of shops, houses, and street lamps, fine carriages, and allhat atmosphere of a large and active town which is always sottractive to a soldier after camp life. Despite his rapid journey andleepless night, Prince Andrew when he drove up to the palace feltven more vigorous and alert than he had done the day before. Only hisyes gleamed feverishly and his thoughts followed one another withxtraordinary clearness and rapidity. He again vividly recalled theetails of the battle, no longer dim, but definite and in theoncise form concise form in which he imagined himself stating them tohe Emperor Francis. He vividly imagined the casual questions thatight be put to him and the answers he would give. He expected to bet once presented to the Emperor. At the chief entrance to the palace,owever, an official came running out to meet him, and learning thate was a special messenger led him to another entrance.
	"To the right from the corridor, Euer Hochgeboren! There you willind the adjutant on duty," said the official. "He will conduct you tohe Minister of War."
	The adjutant on duty, meeting Prince Andrew, asked him to wait,nd went in to the Minister of War. Five minutes later he returned andowing with particular courtesy ushered Prince Andrew before him along corridor to the cabinet where the Minister of War was at work. Thedjutant by his elaborate courtesy appeared to wish to ward off anyttempt at familiarity on the part of the Russian messenger.
	Prince Andrew's joyous feeling was considerably weakened as hepproached the door of the minister's room. He felt offended, andithout his noticing it the feeling of offense immediately turned intone of disdain which was quite uncalled for. His fertile mindnstantly suggested to him a point of view which gave him a right toespise the adjutant and the minister. "Away from the smell of powder,hey probably think it easy to gain victories!" he thought. His eyesarrowed disdainfully, he entered the room of the Minister of War witheculiarly deliberate steps. This feeling of disdain was heightenedhen he saw the minister seated at a large table reading some papersnd making pencil notes on them, and for the first two or threeinutes taking no notice of his arrival. A wax candle stood at eachide of the minister's bent bald head with its gray temples. He wentn reading to the end, without raising his eyes at the opening ofhe door and the sound of footsteps.
	"Take this and deliver it," said he to his adjutant, handing him theapers and still taking no notice of the special messenger.
	Prince Andrew felt that either the actions of Kutuzov's armynterested the Minister of War less than any of the other matters heas concerned with, or he wanted to give the Russian special messengerhat impression. "But that is a matter of perfect indifference to me,"e thought. The minister drew the remaining papers together,rranged them evenly, and then raised his head. He had an intellectualnd distinctive head, but the instant he turned to Prince Andrew theirm, intelligent expression on his face changed in a way evidentlyeliberate and habitual to him. His face took on the stupid artificialmile (which does not even attempt to hide its artificiality) of a manho is continually receiving many petitioners one after another.
	"From General Field Marshal Kutuzov?" he asked. "I hope it is goodews? There has been an encounter with Mortier? A victory? It was highime!"
	He took the dispatch which was addressed to him and began to read itith a mournful expression.
	"Oh, my God! My God! Schmidt!" he exclaimed in German. "What aalamity! What a calamity!"
	Having glanced through the dispatch he laid it on the table andooked at Prince Andrew, evidently considering something.
	"Ah what a calamity! You say the affair was decisive? But Mortier isot captured." Again he pondered. "I am very glad you have broughtood news, though Schmidt's death is a heavy price to pay for theictory. His Majesty will no doubt wish to see you, but not today. Ihank you! You must have a rest. Be at the levee tomorrow after thearade. However, I will let you know."
	The stupid smile, which had left his face while he was speaking,eappeared.
	"Au revoir! Thank you very much. His Majesty will probably desire toee you," he added, bowing his head.
	When Prince Andrew left the palace he felt that all the interest andappiness the victory had afforded him had been now left in thendifferent hands of the Minister of War and the polite adjutant.he whole tenor of his thoughts instantaneously changed; the battleeemed the memory of a remote event long past.BK2|CH10
	CHAPTER X
	Prince Andrew stayed at Brunn with Bilibin, a Russian acquaintancef his in the diplomatic service.
	"Ah, my dear prince! I could not have a more welcome visitor,"aid Bilibin as he came out to meet Prince Andrew. "Franz, put therince's things in my bedroom," said he to the servant who wasshering Bolkonski in. "So you're a messenger of victory, eh?plendid! And I am sitting here ill, as you see."
	After washing and dressing, Prince Andrew came into the diplomat'suxurious study and sat down to the dinner prepared for him. Bilibinettled down comfortably beside the fire.
	After his journey and the campaign during which he had been deprivedf all the comforts of cleanliness and all the refinements of life,rince Andrew felt a pleasant sense of repose among luxuriousurroundings such as he had been accustomed to from childhood. Besidest was pleasant, after his reception by the Austrians, to speak if notn Russian (for they were speaking French) at least with a Russian whoould, he supposed, share the general Russian antipathy to theustrians which was then particularly strong.
	Bilibin was a man of thirty-five, a bachelor, and of the same circles Prince Andrew. They had known each other previously inetersburg, but had become more intimate when Prince Andrew was inienna with Kutuzov. Just as Prince Andrew was a young man who gaveromise of rising high in the military profession, so to an evenreater extent Bilibin gave promise of rising in his diplomaticareer. He still a young man but no longer a young diplomat, as he hadntered the service at the age of sixteen, had been in Paris andopenhagen, and now held a rather important post in Vienna. Both theoreign minister and our ambassador in Vienna knew him and valued him.e was not one of those many diplomats who are esteemed because theyave certain negative qualities, avoid doing certain things, and speakrench. He was one of those, who, liking work, knew how to do it,nd despite his indolence would sometimes spend a whole night at hisriting table. He worked well whatever the import of his work. Itas not the question "What for?" but the question "How?" thatnterested him. What the diplomatic matter might be he did not care,ut it gave him great pleasure to prepare a circular, memorandum, oreport, skillfully, pointedly, and elegantly. Bilibin's servicesere valued not only for what he wrote, but also for his skill inealing and conversing with those in the highest spheres.
	Bilibin liked conversation as he liked work, only when it could beade elegantly witty. In society he always awaited an opportunity toay something striking and took part in a conversation only whenhat was possible. His conversation was always sprinkled withittily original, finished phrases of general interest. Theseayings were prepared in the inner laboratory of his mind in aortable form as if intentionally, so that insignificant societyeople might carry them from drawing room to drawing room. And, inact, Bilibin's witticisms were hawked about in the Viennese drawingooms and often had an influence on matters considered important.
	His thin, worn, sallow face was covered with deep wrinkles, whichlways looked as clean and well washed as the tips of one's fingersfter a Russian bath. The movement of these wrinkles formed therincipal play of expression on his face. Now his forehead woulducker into deep folds and his eyebrows were lifted, then his eyebrowsould descend and deep wrinkles would crease his cheeks. His small,eep-set eyes always twinkled and looked out straight.
	"Well, now tell me about your exploits," said he.
	Bolkonski, very modestly without once mentioning himself,escribed the engagement and his reception by the Minister of War.
	"They received me and my news as one receives a dog in a game ofkittles," said he in conclusion.
	Bilibin smiled and the wrinkles on his face disappeared.
	"Cependant, mon cher," he remarked, examining his nails from aistance and puckering the skin above his left eye, "malgre la hautestime que je professe pour the Orthodox Russian army, j'avoue queotre victoire n'est pas des plus victorieuses."*
	*"But my dear fellow, with all my respect for the Orthodox Russianrmy, I must say that your victory was not particularly victorious."
	He went on talking in this way in French, uttering only thoseords in Russian on which he wished to put a contemptuous emphasis.
	"Come now! You with all your forces fall on the unfortunateortier and his one division, and even then Mortier slips through youringers! Where's the victory?"
	"But seriously," said Prince Andrew, "we can at any rate say withoutoasting that it was a little better than at Ulm..."
	"Why didn't you capture one, just one, marshal for us?"
	"Because not everything happens as one expects or with themoothness of a parade. We had expected, as I told you, to get atheir rear by seven in the morning but had not reached it by five inhe afternoon."
	"And why didn't you do it at seven in the morning? You ought to haveeen there at seven in the morning," returned Bilibin with a smile.You ought to have been there at seven in the morning."
	"Why did you not succeed in impressing on Bonaparte by diplomaticethods that he had better leave Genoa alone?" retorted Princendrew in the same tone.
	"I know," interrupted Bilibin, "you're thinking it's very easy toake marshals, sitting on a sofa by the fire! That is true, buttill why didn't you capture him? So don't be surprised if not onlyhe Minister of War but also his Most August Majesty the Emperor anding Francis is not much delighted by your victory. Even I, a poorecretary of the Russian Embassy, do not feel any need in token ofy joy to give my Franz a thaler, or let him go with his Liebchen tohe Prater... True, we have no Prater here..."
	He looked straight at Prince Andrew and suddenly unwrinkled hisorehead.
	"It is now my turn to ask you 'why?' mon cher," said Bolkonski. "Ionfess I do not understand: perhaps there are diplomatic subtletiesere beyond my feeble intelligence, but I can't make it out. Mackoses a whole army, the Archduke Ferdinand and the Archduke Karlive no signs of life and make blunder after blunder. Kutuzov alone atast gains a real victory, destroying the spell of the invincibilityf the French, and the Minister of War does not even care to hearhe details."
	"That's just it, my dear fellow. You see it's hurrah for the Tsar,or Russia, for the Orthodox Greek faith! All that is beautiful, buthat do we, I mean the Austrian court, care for your victories?ring us nice news of a victory by the Archduke Karl or Ferdinand (onerchduke's as good as another, as you know) and even if it is onlyver a fire brigade of Bonaparte's, that will be another story ande'll fire off some cannon! But this sort of thing seems done onurpose to vex us. The Archduke Karl does nothing, the Archdukeerdinand disgraces himself. You abandon Vienna, give up itsefense- as much as to say: 'Heaven is with us, but heaven help yound your capital!' The one general whom we all loved, Schmidt, youxpose to a bullet, and then you congratulate us on the victory! Admithat more irritating news than yours could not have been conceived.t's as if it had been done on purpose, on purpose. Besides, supposeou did gain a brilliant victory, if even the Archduke Karl gained aictory, what effect would that have on the general course ofvents? It's too late now when Vienna is occupied by the French army!"
	"What? Occupied? Vienna occupied?"
	"Not only occupied, but Bonaparte is at Schonbrunn, and the count,ur dear Count Vrbna, goes to him for orders."
	After the fatigues and impressions of the journey, his reception,nd especially after having dined, Bolkonski felt that he could notake in the full significance of the words he heard.
	"Count Lichtenfels was here this morning," Bilibin continued, "andhowed me a letter in which the parade of the French in Vienna wasully described: Prince Murat et tout le tremblement... You see thatour victory is not a matter for great rejoicing and that you can't beeceived as a savior."
	"Really I don't care about that, I don't care at all," said Princendrew, beginning to understand that his news of the battle beforerems was really of small importance in view of such events as theall of Austria's capital. "How is it Vienna was taken? What of theridge and its celebrated bridgehead and Prince Auersperg? We heardeports that Prince Auersperg was defending Vienna?" he said.
	"Prince Auersperg is on this, on our side of the river, and isefending us- doing it very badly, I think, but still he isefending us. But Vienna is on the other side. No, the bridge hasot yet been taken and I hope it will not be, for it is mined andrders have been given to blow it up. Otherwise we should long agoave been in the mountains of Bohemia, and you and your army wouldave spent a bad quarter of an hour between two fires."
	"But still this does not mean that the campaign is over," saidrince Andrew.
	"Well, I think it is. The bigwigs here think so too, but theyaren't say so. It will be as I said at the beginning of the campaign,t won't be your skirmishing at Durrenstein, or gunpowder at all, thatill decide the matter, but those who devised it," said Bilibinuoting one of his own mots, releasing the wrinkles on his forehead,nd pausing. "The only question is what will come of the meetingetween the Emperor Alexander and the King of Prussia in Berlin? Ifrussia joins the Allies, Austria's hand will be forced and there wille war. If not it is merely a question of settling where thereliminaries of the new Campo Formio are to be drawn up."
	"What an extraordinary genius!" Prince Andrew suddenly exclaimed,lenching his small hand and striking the table with it, "and whatuck the man has!"
	"Buonaparte?" said Bilibin inquiringly, puckering up his forehead tondicate that he was about to say something witty. "Buonaparte?" heepeated, accentuating the u: "I think, however, now that he lays downaws for Austria at Schonbrunn, il faut lui faire grace de l'u!* Ihall certainly adopt an innovation and call him simply Bonaparte!"
	*"We must let him off the u!"
	"But joking apart," said Prince Andrew, "do you really think theampaign is over?"
	"This is what I think. Austria has been made a fool of, and she isot used to it. She will retaliate. And she has been fooled in theirst place because her provinces have been pillaged- they say theoly Russian army loots terribly- her army is destroyed, her capitalaken, and all this for the beaux yeux* of His Sardinian Majesty.nd therefore- this is between ourselves- I instinctively feel that were being deceived, my instinct tells me of negotiations with Francend projects for peace, a secret peace concluded separately."
	*Fine eyes.
	"Impossible!" cried Prince Andrew. "That would be too base."
	"If we live we shall see," replied Bilibin, his face againecoming smooth as a sign that the conversation was at an end.
	When Prince Andrew reached the room prepared for him and lay down in clean shirt on the feather bed with its warmed and fragrant pillows,e felt that the battle of which he had brought tidings was far, farway from him. The alliance with Prussia, Austria's treachery,onaparte's new triumph, tomorrow's levee and parade, and the audienceith the Emperor Francis occupied his thoughts.
	He closed his eyes, and immediately a sound of cannonading, ofusketry and the rattling of carriage wheels seemed to fill hisars, and now again drawn out in a thin line the musketeers wereescending the hill, the French were firing, and he felt his heartalpitating as he rode forward beside Schmidt with the bullets merrilyhistling all around, and he experienced tenfold the joy of living, ase had not done since childhood.
	He woke up...
	"Yes, that all happened!" he said, and, smiling happily to himselfike a child, he fell into a deep, youthful slumber.BK2|CH11
	CHAPTER XI
	Next day he woke late. Recalling his recent impressions, the firsthought that came into his mind was that today he had to beresented to the Emperor Francis; he remembered the Minister of War,he polite Austrian adjutant, Bilibin, and last night'sonversation. Having dressed for his attendance at court in fullarade uniform, which he had not worn for a long time, he went intoilibin's study fresh, animated, and handsome, with his hand bandaged.n the study were four gentlemen of the diplomatic corps. Withrince Hippolyte Kuragin, who was a secretary to the embassy,olkonski was already acquainted. Bilibin introduced him to thethers.
	The gentlemen assembled at Bilibin's were young, wealthy, gayociety men, who here, as in Vienna, formed a special set whichilibin, their leader, called les notres.* This set, consisting almostxclusively of diplomats, evidently had its own interests which hadothing to do with war or politics but related to high society, toertain women, and to the official side of the service. Theseentlemen received Prince Andrew as one of themselves, an honor theyid not extend to many. From politeness and to start conversation,hey asked him a few questions about the army and the battle, and thenhe talk went off into merry jests and gossip.
	*Ours.
	"But the best of it was," said one, telling of the misfortune of aellow diplomat, "that the Chancellor told him flatly that hisppointment to London was a promotion and that he was so to regard it.an you fancy the figure he cut?..."
	"But the worst of it, gentlemen- I am giving Kuragin away to you- ishat that man suffers, and this Don Juan, wicked fellow, is takingdvantage of it!"
	Prince Hippolyte was lolling in a lounge chair with his legs overts arm. He began to laugh.
	"Tell me about that!" he said.
	"Oh, you Don Juan! You serpent!" cried several voices.
	"You, Bolkonski, don't know," said Bilibin turning to Prince Andrew,that all the atrocities of the French army (I nearly said of theussian army) are nothing compared to what this man has been doingmong the women!"
	"La femme est la compagne de l'homme,"* announced Princeippolyte, and began looking through a lorgnette at his elevated legs.
	*"Woman is man's companion."
	Bilibin and the rest of "ours" burst out laughing in Hippolyte'sace, and Prince Andrew saw that Hippolyte, of whom- he had todmit- he had almost been jealous on his wife's account, was theutt of this set.
	"Oh, I must give you a treat," Bilibin whispered to Bolkonski.Kuragin is exquisite when he discusses politics- you should see hisravity!"
	He sat down beside Hippolyte and wrinkling his forehead beganalking to him about politics. Prince Andrew and the others gatheredound these two.
	"The Berlin cabinet cannot express a feeling of alliance," beganippolyte gazing round with importance at the others, "withoutxpressing... as in its last note... you understand... Besides, unlessis Majesty the Emperor derogates from the principle of ourlliance...
	"Wait, I have not finished..." he said to Prince Andrew, seizing himy the arm, "I believe that intervention will be stronger thanonintervention. And..." he paused. "Finally one cannot impute theonreceipt of our dispatch of November 18. That is how it will end."nd he released Bolkonski's arm to indicate that he had now quiteinished.
	"Demosthenes, I know thee by the pebble thou secretest in thy goldenouth!" said Bilibin, and the mop of hair on his head moved withatisfaction.
	Everybody laughed, and Hippolyte louder than anyone. He wasvidently distressed, and breathed painfully, but could not restrainhe wild laughter that convulsed his usually impassive features.
	"Well now, gentlemen," said Bilibin, "Bolkonski is my guest inhis house and in Brunn itself. I want to entertain him as far as Ian, with all the pleasures of life here. If we were in Vienna itould be easy, but here, in this wretched Moravian hole, it is moreifficult, and I beg you all to help me. Brunn's attractions must behown him. You can undertake the theater, I society, and you,ippolyte, of course the women."
	"We must let him see Amelie, she's exquisite!" said one of "ours,"issing his finger tips.
	"In general we must turn this bloodthirsty soldier to more humanenterests," said Bilibin.
	"I shall scarcely be able to avail myself of your hospitality,entlemen, it is already time for me to go," replied Prince Andrewooking at his watch.
	"Where to?"
	"To the Emperor."
	"Oh! Oh! Oh!" Well, au revoir, Bolkonski! Au revoir, Prince! Comeack early to dinner," cried several voices. "We'll take you in hand."
	"When speaking to the Emperor, try as far as you can to praise theay that provisions are supplied and the routes indicated," saidilibin, accompanying him to the hall.
	"I should like to speak well of them, but as far as I the facts, Ian't," replied Bolkonski, smiling.
	"Well, talk as much as you can, anyway. He has a passion foriving audiences, but he does not like talking himself and can't dot, as you will see."BK2|CH12
	CHAPTER XII
	At the levee Prince Andrew stood among the Austrian officers as head been told to, and the Emperor Francis merely looked fixedly intois face and just nodded to him with to him with his long head. Butfter it was over, the adjutant he had seen the previous dayeremoniously informed Bolkonski that the Emperor desired to giveim an audience. The Emperor Francis received him standing in theiddle of the room. Before the conversation began Prince Andrew wastruck by the fact that the Emperor seemed confused and blushed asf not knowing what to say.
	"Tell me, when did the battle begin?" he asked hurriedly.
	Prince Andrew replied. Then followed other questions just as simple:Was Kutuzov well? When had he left Krems?" and so on. The Emperorpoke as if his sole aim were to put a given number of questions-he answers to these questions, as was only too evident, did notnterest him.
	"At what o'clock did the battle begin?" asked the Emperor.
	"I cannot inform Your Majesty at what o'clock the battle began athe front, but at Durrenstein, where I was, our attack began afterive in the afternoon," replied Bolkonski growing more animated andxpecting that he would have a chance to give a reliable account,hich he had ready in his mind, of all he knew and had seen. But themperor smiled and interrupted him.
	"How many miles?"
	"From where to where, Your Majesty?"
	"From Durrenstein to Krems."
	"Three and a half miles, Your Majesty."
	"The French have abandoned the left bank?"
	"According to the scouts the last of them crossed on rafts duringhe night."
	"Is there sufficient forage in Krems?"
	"Forage has not been supplied to the extent..."
	The Emperor interrupted him.
	"At what o'clock was General Schmidt killed?"
	"At seven o'clock, I believe."
	"At seven o'clock? It's very sad, very sad!"
	The Emperor thanked Prince Andrew and bowed. Prince Andrewithdrew and was immediately surrounded by courtiers on all sides.verywhere he saw friendly looks and heard friendly words. Yesterday'sdjutant reproached him for not having stayed at the palace, andffered him his own house. The Minister of War came up andongratulated him on the Maria Theresa Order of the third grade, whichhe Emperor was conferring on him. The Empress' chamberlain invitedim to see Her Majesty. The archduchess also wished to see him. He didot know whom to answer, and for a few seconds collected his thoughts.hen the Russian ambassador took him by the shoulder, led him to theindow, and began to talk to him.
	Contrary to Bilibin's forecast the news he had brought wasoyfully received. A thanksgiving service was arranged, Kutuzov waswarded the Grand Cross of Maria Theresa, and the whole armyeceived rewards. Bolkonski was invited everywhere, and had to spendhe whole morning calling on the principal Austrian dignitaries.etween four and five in the afternoon, having made all his calls,e was returning to Bilibin's house thinking out a letter to hisather about the battle and his visit to Brunn. At the door he found aehicle half full of luggage. Franz, Bilibin's man, was dragging aortmanteau with some difficulty out of the front door.
	Before returning to Bilibin's Prince Andrew had gone to bookshopo provide himself with some books for the campaign, and had spentome time in the shop.
	"What is it?" he asked.
	"Oh, your excellency!" said Franz, with difficulty rolling theortmanteau into the vehicle, "we are to move on still farther. Thecoundrel is again at our heels!"
	"Eh? What?" asked Prince Andrew.
	Bilibin came out to meet him. His usually calm face showedxcitement.
	"There now! Confess that this is delightful," said he. "Thisffair of the Thabor Bridge, at Vienna.... They have crossed withouttriking a blow!"
	Prince Andrew could not understand.
	"But where do you come from not to know what every coachman in theown knows?"
	"I come from the archduchess'. I heard nothing there."
	"And you didn't see that everybody is packing up?"
	"I did not... What is it all about?" inquired Prince Andrewmpatiently.
	"What's it all about? Why, the French have crossed the bridge thatuersperg was defending, and the bridge was not blown up: so Murats now rushing along the road to Brunn and will be here in a day orwo."
	"What? Here? But why did they not blow up the bridge, if it wasined?"
	"That is what I ask you. No one, not even Bonaparte, knows why."
	Bolkonski shrugged his shoulders.
	"But if the bridge is crossed it means that the army too is lost? Itill be cut off," said he.
	"That's just it," answered Bilibin. "Listen! The French enteredienna as I told you. Very well. Next day, which was yesterday,hose gentlemen, messieurs les marechaux,* Murat, Lannes,and Belliard,ount and ride to bridge. (Observe that all three are Gascons.)Gentlemen,' says one of them, 'you know the Thabor Bridge is minednd doubly mined and that there are menacing fortifications at itsead and an army of fifteen thousand men has been ordered to blow uphe bridge and not let us cross? But it will please our sovereignhe Emperor Napoleon if we take this bridge, so let us three go andake it!' 'Yes, let's!' say the others. And off they go and take theridge, cross it, and now with their whole army are on this side ofhe Danube, marching on us, you, and your lines of communication."
	*The marshalls.
	"Stop jesting," said Prince Andrew sadly and seriously. This newsrieved him and yet he was pleased.
	As soon as he learned that the Russian army was in such a hopelessituation it occurred to him that it was he who was destined to leadt out of this position; that here was the Toulon that would liftim from the ranks of obscure officers and offer him the first step toame! Listening to Bilibin he was already imagining how on reachinghe army he would give an opinion at the war council which would behe only one that could save the army, and how he alone would bentrusted with the executing of the plan.
	"Stop this jesting," he said
	"I am not jesting," Bilibin went on. "Nothing is truer or sadder.hese gentlemen ride onto the bridge alone and wave whiteandkerchiefs; they assure the officer on duty that they, thearshals, are on their way to negotiate with Prince Auersperg. He letshem enter the tete-de-pont.* They spin him a thousand gasconades,aying that the war is over, that the Emperor Francis is arranging aeeting with Bonaparte, that they desire to see Prince Auersperg,nd so on. The officer sends for Auersperg; these gentlemen embracehe officers, crack jokes, sit on the cannon, and meanwhile a Frenchattalion gets to the bridge unobserved, flings the bags of incendiaryaterial into the water, and approaches the tete-de-pont. At lengthppears the lieutenant general, our dear Prince Auersperg vonautern himself. 'Dearest foe! Flower of the Austrian army, hero ofhe Turkish wars Hostilities are ended, we can shake one another'sand.... The Emperor Napoleon burns with impatience to make Princeuersperg's acquaintance.' In a word, those gentlemen, Gascons indeed,o bewildered him with fine words, and he is so flattered by hisapidly established intimacy with the French marshals, and soazzled by the sight of Murat's mantle and ostrich plumes, qu'il n'yoit que du feu, et oublie celui qu'il devait faire faire sur'ennemi!"*[2] In spite of the animation of his speech, Bilibin didot forget to pause after this mot to give time for its dueppreciation. "The French battalion rushes to the bridgehead, spikeshe guns, and the bridge is taken! But what is best of all," he wentn, his excitement subsiding under the delightful interest of hiswn story, "is that the sergeant in charge of the cannon which waso give the signal to fire the mines and blow up the bridge, thisergeant, seeing that the French troops were running onto theridge, was about to fire, but Lannes stayed his hand. The sergeant,ho was evidently wiser than his general, goes up to Auersperg andays: 'Prince, you are being deceived, here are the French!' Murat,eeing that all is lost if the sergeant is allowed to speak, turnso Auersperg with feigned astonishment (he is a true Gascon) and says:I don't recognize the world-famous Austrian discipline, if youllow a subordinate to address you like that!' It was a stroke ofenius. Prince Auersperg feels his dignity at stake and orders theergeant to be arrested. Come, you must own that this affair of thehabor Bridge is delightful! It is not exactly stupidity, norascality...."
	*Bridgehead.
	*[2] That their fire gets into his eyes and he forgets that he oughto be firing at the enemy.
	"It may be treachery," said Prince Andrew, vividly imagining theray overcoats, wounds, the smoke of gunpowder, the sounds ofiring, and the glory that awaited him.
	"Not that either. That puts the court in too bad a light," repliedilibin."It's not treachery nor rascality nor stupidity: it is just ast Ulm... it is..."- he seemed to be trying to find the rightxpression. "C'est... c'est du Mack. Nous sommes mackes [It is... its a bit of Mack. We are Macked]," he concluded, feeling that he hadroduced a good epigram, a fresh one that would be repeated. Hisitherto puckered brow became smooth as a sign of pleasure, and with alight smile he began to examine his nails.
	"Where are you off to?" he said suddenly to Prince Andrew who hadisen and was going toward his room.
	"I am going away."
	"Where to?"
	"To the army."
	"But you meant to stay another two days?"
	"But now I am off at once."
	And Prince Andrew after giving directions about his departure wento his room.
	"Do you know, mon cher," said Bilibin following him, "I have beenhinking about you. Why are you going?"
	And in proof of the conclusiveness of his opinion all the wrinklesanished from his face.
	Prince Andrew looked inquiringly at him and gave no reply.
	"Why are you going? I know you think it your duty to gallop backo the army now that it is in danger. I understand that. Mon cher,t is heroism!"
	"Not at all," said Prince Andrew.
	"But as you are a philosopher, be a consistent one, look at thether side of the question and you will see that your duty, on theontrary, is to take care of yourself. Leave it to those who are noonger fit for anything else.... You have not been ordered to returnnd have not been dismissed from here; therefore, you can stay ando with us wherever our ill luck takes us. They say we are going tolmutz, and Olmutz is a very decent town. You and I will travelomfortably in my caleche."
	"Do stop joking, Bilibin," cried Bolkonski.
	"I am speaking sincerely as a friend! Consider! Where and why areou going, when you might remain here? You are faced by one of twohings," and the skin over his left temple puckered, "either youill not reach your regiment before peace is concluded, or you willhare defeat and disgrace with Kutuzov's whole army."
	And Bilibin unwrinkled his temple, feeling that the dilemma wasnsoluble.
	"I cannot argue about it," replied Prince Andrew coldly, but hehought: "I am going to save the army."
	"My dear fellow, you are a hero!" said Bilibin.BK2|CH13
	CHAPTER XIII
	That same night, having taken leave of the Minister of War,olkonski set off to rejoin the army, not knowing where he wouldind it and fearing to be captured by the French on the way to Krems.
	In Brunn everybody attached to the court was packing up, and theeavy baggage was already being dispatched to Olmutz. Near Hetzelsdorfrince Andrew struck the high road along which the Russian army wasoving with great haste and in the greatest disorder. The road waso obstructed with carts that it was impossible to get by in aarriage. Prince Andrew took a horse and a Cossack from a Cossackommander, and hungry and weary, making his way past the baggageagons, rode in search of the commander in chief and of his ownuggage. Very sinister reports of the position of the army reached hims he went along, and the appearance of the troops in their disorderlylight confirmed these rumors.
	"Cette armee russe que l'or de l'Angleterre a transportee desxtremites de l'univers, nous allons lui faire eprouver le memeort- (le sort de l'armee d'Ulm)."* He remembered these words inonaparte's address to his army at the beginning of the campaign,nd they awoke in him astonishment at the genius of his hero, aeeling of wounded pride, and a hope of glory. "And should there beothing left but to die?" he thought. "Well, if need be, I shall do ito worse than others."
	*"That Russian army which has been brought from the ends of thearth by English gold, we shall cause to share the same fate- (theate of the army at Ulm)."
	He looked with disdain at the endless confused mass ofetachments, carts, guns, artillery, and again baggage wagons andehicles of all kinds overtaking one another and blocking the muddyoad, three and sometimes four abreast. From all sides, behind andefore, as far as ear could reach, there were the rattle of wheels,he creaking of carts and gun carriages, the tramp of horses, therack of whips, shouts, the urging of horses, and the swearing ofoldiers, orderlies, and officers. All along the sides of the roadallen horses were to be seen, some flayed, some not, androken-down carts beside which solitary soldiers sat waiting foromething, and again soldiers straggling from their companies,rowds of whom set off to the neighboring villages, or returned fromhem dragging sheep, fowls, hay, and bulging sacks. At each ascentr descent of the road the crowds were yet denser and the din ofhouting more incessant. Soldiers floundering knee-deep in mudushed the guns and wagons themselves. Whips cracked, hoofs slipped,races broke, and lungs were strained with shouting. The officersirecting the march rode backward and forward between the carts. Theiroices were but feebly heard amid the uproar and one saw by theiraces that they despaired of the possibility of checking thisisorder.
	"Here is our dear Orthodox Russian army," thought Bolkonski,ecalling Bilibin's words.
	Wishing to find out where the commander in chief was, he rode upo a convoy. Directly opposite to him came a strange one-horseehicle, evidently rigged up by soldiers out of any availableaterials and looking like something between a cart, a cabriolet,nd a caleche. A soldier was driving, and a woman enveloped inhawls sat behind the apron under the leather hood of the vehicle.rince Andrew rode up and was just putting his question to a soldierhen his attention was diverted by the desperate shrieks of theoman in the vehicle. An officer in charge of transport was beatinghe soldier who was driving the woman's vehicle for trying to gethead of others, and the strokes of his whip fell on the apron ofhe equipage. The woman screamed piercingly. Seeing Prince Andrewhe leaned out from behind the apron and, waving her thin arms fromnder the woolen shawl, cried:
	"Mr. Aide-de-camp! Mr. Aide-de-camp!... For heaven's sake... Protecte! What will become of us? I am the wife of the doctor of the Seventhhasseurs.... They won't let us pass, we are left behind and have lostur people..."
	"I'll flatten you into a pancake!" shouted the angry officer tohe soldier. "Turn back with your slut!"
	"Mr. Aide-de-camp! Help me!... What does it all mean?" screamedhe doctor's wife.
	"Kindly let this cart pass. Don't you see it's a woman?" said Princendrew riding up to the officer.
	The officer glanced at him, and without replying turned again to theoldier. "I'll teach you to push on!... Back!"
	"Let them pass, I tell you!" repeated Prince Andrew, compressing hisips.
	"And who are you?" cried the officer, turning on him with tipsyage, "who are you? Are you in command here? Eh? I am commanderere, not you! Go back or I'll flatten you into a pancake," repeatede. This expression evidently pleased him.
	"That was a nice snub for the little aide-de-camp," came a voicerom behind.
	Prince Andrew saw that the officer was in that state of senseless,ipsy rage when a man does not know what he is saying. He saw that hishampionship of the doctor's wife in her queer trap might expose himo what he dreaded more than anything in the world- to ridicule; butis instinct urged him on. Before the officer finished his sentencerince Andrew, his face distorted with fury, rode up to him and raisedis riding whip.
	"Kind...ly let- them- pass!"
	The officer flourished his arm and hastily rode away.
	"It's all the fault of these fellows on the staff that there'shis disorder," he muttered. "Do as you like."
	Prince Andrew without lifting his eyes rode hastily away from theoctor's wife, who was calling him her deliverer, and recalling with aense of disgust the minutest details of this humiliating scene healloped on to the village where he was told that the commander inhief was.
	On reaching the village he dismounted and went to the nearest house,ntending to rest if but for a moment, eat something, and try toort out the stinging and tormenting thoughts that confused hisind. "This is a mob of scoundrels and not an army," he was thinkings he went up to the window of the first house, when a familiaroice called him by name.
	He turned round. Nesvitski's handsome face looked out of theittle window. Nesvitski, moving his moist lips as he chewedomething, and flourishing his arm, called him to enter.
	"Bolkonski! Bolkonski!... Don't you hear? Eh? Come quick..." hehouted.
	Entering the house, Prince Andrew saw Nesvitski and another adjutantaving something to eat. They hastily turned round to him asking if head any news. On their familiar faces he read agitation and alarm.his was particularly noticeable on Nesvitski's usually laughingountenance.
	"Where is the commander in chief?" asked Bolkonski.
	"Here, in that house," answered the adjutant.
	"Well, is it true that it's peace and capitulation?" askedesvitski.
	"I was going to ask you. I know nothing except that it was all Iould do to get here."
	"And we, my dear boy! It's terrible! I was wrong to laugh at Mack,e're getting it still worse," said Nesvitski. "But sit down andave something to eat."
	"You won't be able to find either your baggage or anything else now,rince. And God only knows where your man Peter is," said the otherdjutant.
	"Where are headquarters?"
	"We are to spend the night in Znaim."
	"Well, I have got all I need into packs for two horses," saidesvitski. "They've made up splendid packs for me- fit to cross theohemian mountains with. It's a bad lookout, old fellow! But what'she matter with you? You must be ill to shiver like that," he added,oticing that Prince Andrew winced as at an electric shock.
	"It's nothing," replied Prince Andrew.
	He had just remembered his recent encounter with the doctor's wifend the convoy officer.
	"What is the commander in chief doing here?" he asked.
	"I can't make out at all," said Nesvitski.
	"Well, all I can make out is that everything is abominable,bominable, quite abominable!" said Prince Andrew, and he went offo the house where the commander in chief was.
	Passing by Kutuzov's carriage and the exhausted saddle horses of hisuite, with their Cossacks who were talking loudly together, Princendrew entered the passage. Kutuzov himself, he was told, was in theouse with Prince Bagration and Weyrother. Weyrother was theustrian general who had succeeded Schmidt. In the passage littleozlovski was squatting on his heels in front of a clerk. The clerk,ith cuffs turned up, was hastily writing at a tub turned bottompwards. Kozlovski's face looked worn- he too had evidently notlept all night. He glanced at Prince Andrew and did not even nod toim.
	"Second line... have you written it?" he continued dictating tohe clerk. "The Kiev Grenadiers, Podolian..."
	"One can't write so fast, your honor," said the clerk, glancingngrily and disrespectfully at Kozlovski.
	Through the door came the sounds of Kutuzov's voice, excited andissatisfied, interrupted by another, an unfamiliar voice. From theound of these voices, the inattentive way Kozlovski looked at him,he disrespectful manner of the exhausted clerk, the fact that thelerk and Kozlovski were squatting on the floor by a tub so near tohe commander in chief, and from the noisy laughter of the Cossacksolding the horses near the window, Prince Andrew felt thatomething important and disastrous was about to happen.
	He turned to Kozlovski with urgent questions.
	"Immediately, Prince," said Kozlovski. "Dispositions for Bagration."
	"What about capitulation?"
	"Nothing of the sort. Orders are issued for a battle."
	Prince Andrew moved toward the door from whence voices were heard.ust as he was going to open it the sounds ceased, the door opened,nd Kutuzov with his eagle nose and puffy face appeared in theoorway. Prince Andrew stood right in front of Kutuzov but thexpression of the commander in chief's one sound eye showed him toe so preoccupied with thoughts and anxieties as to be oblivious ofis presence. He looked straight at his adjutant's face withoutecognizing him.
	"Well, have you finished?" said he to Kozlovski.
	"One moment, your excellency."
	Bagration, a gaunt middle-aged man of medium height with a firm,mpassive face of Oriental type, came out after the commander inhief.
	"I have the honor to present myself," repeated Prince Andrewather loudly, handing Kutuzov an envelope.
	Ah, from Vienna? Very good. Later, later!"
	Kutuzov went out into the porch with Bagration.
	"Well, good-by, Prince," said he to Bagration. "My blessing, and mayhrist be with you in your great endeavor!"
	His face suddenly softened and tears came into his eyes. With hiseft hand he drew Bagration toward him, and with his right, on whiche wore a ring, he made the sign of the cross over him with aesture evidently habitual, offering his puffy cheek, but Bagrationissed him on the neck instead.
	"Christ be with you!" Kutuzov repeated and went toward his carriage.Get in with me," said he to Bolkonski.
	"Your excellency, I should like to be of use here. Allow me toemain with Prince Bagration's detachment."
	"Get in," said Kutuzov, and noticing that Bolkonski still delayed,e added: "I need good officers myself, need them myself!"
	They got into the carriage and drove for a few minutes in silence.
	"There is still much, much before us," he said, as if with an oldan's penetration he understood all that was passing in Bolkonski'sind. "If a tenth part of his detachment returns I shall thank God,"e added as if speaking to himself.
	Prince Andrew glanced at Kutuzov's face only a foot distant from himnd involuntarily noticed the carefully washed seams of the scarear his temple, where an Ismail bullet had pierced his skull, and thempty eye socket. "Yes, he has a right to speak so calmly of thoseen's death," thought Bolkonski.
	"That is why I beg to be sent to that detachment," he said.
	Kutuzov did not reply. He seemed to have forgotten what he hadeen saying, and sat plunged in thought. Five minutes later, gentlywaying on the soft springs of the carriage, he turned to Princendrew. There was not a trace of agitation on his face. Withelicate irony he questioned Prince Andrew about the details of hisnterview with the Emperor, about the remarks he had heard at courtoncerning the Krems affair, and about some ladies they both knew.BK2|CH14
	CHAPTER XIV
	On November 1 Kutuzov had received, through a spy, news that thermy he commanded was in an almost hopeless position. The spy reportedhat the French, after crossing the bridge at Vienna, were advancingn immense force upon Kutuzov's line of communication with theroops that were arriving from Russia. If Kutuzov decided to remain atrems, Napoleon's army of one hundred and fifty thousand men would cutim off completely and surround his exhausted army of fortyhousand, and he would find himself in the position of Mack at Ulm. Ifutuzov decided to abandon the road connecting him with the troopsrriving from Russia, he would have to march with no road into unknownarts of the Bohemian mountains, defending himself against superiororces of the enemy and abandoning all hope of a junction withuxhowden. If Kutuzov decided to retreat along the road from Kremso Olmutz, to unite with the troops arriving from Russia, he riskedeing forestalled on that road by the French who had crossed theienna bridge, and encumbered by his baggage and transport, havingo accept battle on the march against an enemy three times astrong, who would hem him in from two sides.
	Kutuzov chose this latter course.
	The French, the spy reported, having crossed the Vienna bridge, weredvancing by forced marches toward Znaim, which lay sixty-six milesff on the line of Kutuzov's retreat. If he reached Znaim before therench, there would be great hope of saving the army; to let therench forestall him at Znaim meant the exposure of his whole armyo a disgrace such as that of Ulm, or to utter destruction. But toorestall the French with his whole army was impossible. The roador the French from Vienna to Znaim was shorter and better than theoad for the Russians from Krems to Znaim.
	The night he received the news, Kutuzov sent Bagration's vanguard,our thousand strong, to the right across the hills from therems-Znaim to the Vienna-Znaim road. Bagration was to make this marchithout resting, and to halt facing Vienna with Znaim to his rear, andf he succeeded in forestalling the French he was to delay them asong as possible. Kutuzov himself with all his transport took the roado Znaim.
	Marching thirty miles that stormy night across roadless hills,ith his hungry, ill-shod soldiers, and losing a third of his men astragglers by the way, Bagration came out on the Vienna-Znaim roadt Hollabrunn a few hours ahead of the French who were approachingollabrunn from Vienna. Kutuzov with his transport had still toarch for some days before he could reach Znaim. Hence Bagrationith his four thousand hungry, exhausted men would have to detainor days the whole enemy army that came upon him at Hollabrunn,hich was clearly impossible. But a freak of fate made thempossible possible. The success of the trick that had placed theienna bridge in the hands of the French without a fight led Murato try to deceive Kutuzov in a similar way. Meeting Bagration's weaketachment on the Znaim road he supposed it to be Kutuzov's wholermy. To be able to crush it absolutely he awaited the arrival ofhe rest of the troops who were on their way from Vienna, and withhis object offered a three days' truce on condition that bothrmies should remain in position without moving. Murat declared thategotiations for peace were already proceeding, and that heherefore offered this truce to avoid unnecessary bloodshed. Countostitz, the Austrian general occupying the advanced posts, believedurat's emissary and retired, leaving Bagration's division exposed.nother emissary rode to the Russian line to announce the peaceegotiations and to offer the Russian army the three days' truce.agration replied that he was not authorized either to accept orefuse a truce and sent his adjutant to Kutuzov to report the offer head received.
	A truce was Kutuzov's sole chance of gaining time, givingagration's exhausted troops some rest, and letting the transportnd heavy convoys (whose movements were concealed from the French)dvance if but one stage nearer Znaim. The offer of a truce gave thenly, and a quite unexpected, chance of saving the army. Oneceiving the news he immediately dispatched Adjutant Generalintzingerode, who was in attendance on him, to the enemy camp.intzingerode was not merely to agree to the truce but also to offererms of capitulation, and meanwhile Kutuzov sent his adjutants backo hasten to the utmost the movements of the baggage trains of thentire army along the Krems-Znaim road. Bagration's exhausted andungry detachment, which alone covered this movement of theransport and of the whole army, had to remain stationary in face ofn enemy eight times as strong as itself.
	Kutuzov's expectations that the proposals of capitulation (whichere in no way binding) might give time for part of the transport toass, and also that Murat's mistake would very soon be discovered,roved correct. As soon as Bonaparte (who was at Schonbrunn, sixteeniles from Hollabrunn) received Murat's dispatch with the proposalf a truce and a capitulation, he detected a ruse and wrote theollowing letter to Murat:
	                               Schonbrunn, 25th Brumaire, 1805,
	                                at eight o'clock in the morning
	To PRINCE MURAT,
	I cannot find words to express to you my displeasure. You commandnly my advance guard, and have no right to arrange an armisticeithout my order. You are causing me to lose the fruits of a campaign.reak the armistice immediately and march on the enemy. Inform himhat the general who signed that capitulation had no right to do so,nd that no one but the Emperor of Russia has that right.
	If, however, the Emperor of Russia ratifies that convention, Iill ratify it; but it is only a trick. March on, destroy theussian army.... You are in a position to seize its baggage andrtillery.
	The Russian Emperor's aide-de-camp is an impostor. Officers areothing when they have no powers; this one had none.... Theustrians let themselves be tricked at the crossing of the Viennaridge, you are letting yourself be tricked by an aide-de-camp ofhe Emperor.
	                                                       NAPOLEON
	Bonaparte's adjutant rode full gallop with this menacing letter tourat. Bonaparte himself, not trusting to his generals, moved with allhe Guards to the field of battle, afraid of letting a ready victimscape, and Bagration's four thousand men merrily lighted campfires,ried and warmed themselves, cooked their porridge for the firstime for three days, and not one of them knew or imagined what wasn store for him.BK2|CH15
	CHAPTER XV
	Between three and four o'clock in the afternoon Prince Andrew, whoad persisted in his request to Kutuzov, arrived at Grunth andeported himself to Bagration. Bonaparte's adjutant had not yeteached Murat's detachment and the battle had not yet begun. Inagration's detachment no one knew anything of the general position offfairs. They talked of peace but did not believe in itsossibility; others talked of a battle but also disbelieved in theearness of an engagement. Bagration, knowing Bolkonski to be aavorite and trusted adjutant, received him with distinction andpecial marks of favor, explaining to him that there would probably ben engagement that day or the next, and giving him full liberty toemain with him during the battle or to join the rearguard and have anye on the order of retreat, "which is also very important."
	"However, there will hardly be an engagement today," saidagration as if to reassure Prince Andrew.
	"If he is one of the ordinary little staff dandies sent to earn aedal he can get his reward just as well in the rearguard, but if heishes to stay with me, let him... he'll be of use here if he's arave officer," thought Bagration. Prince Andrew, without replying,sked the prince's permission to ride round the position to see theisposition of the forces, so as to know his bearings should he beent to execute an order. The officer on duty, a handsome, elegantlyressed man with a diamond ring on his forefinger, who was fond ofpeaking French though he spoke it badly, offered to conduct Princendrew.
	On all sides they saw rain-soaked officers with dejected faces whoeemed to be seeking something, and soldiers dragging doors,enches, and fencing from the village.
	"There now, Prince! We can't stop those fellows," said the stafffficer pointing to the soldiers. "The officers don't keep them inand. And there," he pointed to a sutler's tent, "they crowd in andit. This morning I turned them all out and now look, it's full again. must go there, Prince, and scare them a bit. It won't take aoment."
	"Yes, let's go in and I will get myself a roll and some cheese,"aid Prince Andrew who had not yet had time to eat anything.
	"Why didn't you mention it, Prince? I would have offered youomething."
	They dismounted and entered the tent. Several officers, with flushednd weary faces, were sitting at the table eating and drinking.
	"Now what does this mean, gentlemen?" said the staff officer, in theeproachful tone of a man who has repeated the same thing more thannce. "You know it won't do to leave your posts like this. Therince gave orders that no one should leave his post. Now you,aptain," and he turned to a thin, dirty little artillery officerho without his boots (he had given them to the canteen keeper tory), in only his stockings, rose when they entered, smiling notltogether comfortably.
	"Well, aren't you ashamed of yourself, Captain Tushin?" heontinued. "One would think that as an artillery officer you would set good example, yet here you are without your boots! The alarm will beounded and you'll be in a pretty position without your boots!" (Thetaff officer smiled.) "Kindly return to your posts, gentlemen, all ofou, all!" he added in a tone of command.
	Prince Andrew smiled involuntarily as he looked at the artilleryfficer Tushin, who silent and smiling, shifting from one stockingedoot to the other, glanced inquiringly with his large, intelligent,indly eyes from Prince Andrew to the staff officer.
	"The soldiers say it feels easier without boots," said Captainushin smiling shyly in his uncomfortable position, evidentlyishing to adopt a jocular tone. But before he had finished he felthat his jest was unacceptable and had not come off. He grew confused.
	"Kindly return to your posts," said the staff officer trying toreserve his gravity.
	Prince Andrew glanced again at the artillery officer's small figure.here was something peculiar about it, quite unsoldierly, ratheromic, but extremely attractive.
	The staff officer and Prince Andrew mounted their horses and roden.
	Having ridden beyond the village, continually meeting and overtakingoldiers and officers of various regiments, they saw on their leftome entrenchments being thrown up, the freshly dug clay of whichhowed up red. Several battalions of soldiers, in their shirtleeves despite the cold wind, swarmed in these earthworks like a hostf white ants; spadefuls of red clay were continually being thrownp from behind the bank by unseen hands. Prince Andrew and the officerode up, looked at the entrenchment, and went on again. Just behind ithey came upon some dozens of soldiers, continually replaced bythers, who ran from the entrenchment. They had to hold their nosesnd put their horses to a trot to escape from the poisonedtmosphere of these latrines.
	"Voila l'agrement des camps, monsieur le Prince,"* said the stafffficer.
	*"This is a pleasure one gets in camp, Prince."
	They rode up the opposite hill. From there the French couldlready be seen. Prince Andrew stopped and began examining theosition.
	"That's our battery," said the staff officer indicating theighest point. "It's in charge of the queer fellow we saw withoutis boots. You can see everything from there; let's go there, Prince."
	"Thank you very much, I will go on alone," said Prince Andrew,ishing to rid himself of this staff officer's company, "pleaseon't trouble yourself further."
	The staff officer remained behind and Prince Andrew rode on alone.
	The farther forward and nearer the enemy he went, the more orderlynd cheerful were the troops. The greatest disorder and depression hadeen in the baggage train he had passed that morning on the Znaim roadeven miles away from the French. At Grunth also some apprehension andlarm could be felt, but the nearer Prince Andrew came to the Frenchines the more confident was the appearance of our troops. Theoldiers in their greatcoats were ranged in lines, the sergeants majornd company officers were counting the men, poking the last man inach section in the ribs and telling him to hold his hand up. Soldierscattered over the whole place were dragging logs and brushwood andere building shelters with merry chatter and laughter; around theires sat others, dressed and undressed, drying their shirts and legands or mending boots or overcoats and crowding round the boilers andorridge cookers. In one company dinner was ready, and the soldiersere gazing eagerly at the steaming boiler, waiting till the sample,hich a quartermaster sergeant was carrying in a wooden bowl to anfficer who sat on a log before his shelter, had been tasted.
	Another company, a lucky one for not all the companies had vodka,rowded round a pock-marked, broad-shouldered sergeant major who,ilting a keg, filled one after another the canteen lids held out toim. The soldiers lifted the canteen lids to their lips witheverential faces, emptied them, rolling the vodka in their mouths,nd walked away from the sergeant major with brightened expressions,icking their lips and wiping them on the sleeves of their greatcoats.ll their faces were as serene as if all this were happening at homewaiting peaceful encampment, and not within sight of the enemy beforen action in which at least half of them would be left on the field.fter passing a chasseur regiment and in the lines of the Kievrenadiers- fine fellows busy with similar peaceful affairs- nearhe shelter of the regimental commander, higher than and differentrom the others, Prince Andrew came out in front of a platoon ofrenadiers before whom lay a naked man. Two soldiers held him whilewo others were flourishing their switches and striking himegularly on his bare back. The man shrieked unnaturally. A stoutajor was pacing up and down the line, and regardless of the screamsept repeating:
	"It's a shame for a soldier to steal; a soldier must be honest,onorable, and brave, but if he robs his fellows there is no honorn him, he's a scoundrel. Go on! Go on!"
	So the swishing sound of the strokes, and the desperate butnnatural screams, continued.
	"Go on, go on!" said the major.
	A young officer with a bewildered and pained expression on hisace stepped away from the man and looked round inquiringly at thedjutant as he rode by.
	Prince Andrew, having reached the front line, rode along it. Ourront line and that of the enemy were far apart on the right andeft flanks, but in the center where the men with a flag of trucead passed that morning, the lines were so near together that theen could see one another's faces and speak to one another. Besideshe soldiers who formed the picket line on either side, there wereany curious onlookers who, jesting and laughing, stared at theirtrange foreign enemies.
	Since early morning- despite an injunction not to approach theicket line- the officers had been unable to keep sight-seers away.he soldiers forming the picket line, like showmen exhibiting auriosity, no longer looked at the French but paid attention to theight-seers and grew weary waiting to be relieved. Prince Andrewalted to have a look at the French.
	"Look! Look there!" one soldier was saying to another, pointing to aussian musketeer who had gone up to the picket line with an officernd was rapidly and excitedly talking to a French grenadier. "Harko him jabbering! Fine, isn't it? It's all the Frenchy can do toeep up with him. There now, Sidorov!"
	"Wait a bit and listen. It's fine!" answered Sidorov, who wasonsidered an adept at French.
	The soldier to whom the laughers referred was Dolokhov. Princendrew recognized him and stopped to listen to what he was saying.olokhov had come from the left flank where their regiment wastationed, with his captain.
	"Now then, go on, go on!" incited the officer, bending forward andrying not to lose a word of the speech which was incomprehensibleo him. "More, please: more! What's he saying?"
	Dolokhov did not answer the captain; he had been drawn into a hotispute with the French grenadier. They were naturally talking abouthe campaign. The Frenchman, confusing the Austrians with theussians, was trying to prove that the Russians had surrendered andad fled all the way from Ulm, while Dolokhov maintained that theussians had not surrendered but had beaten the French.
	"We have orders to drive you off here, and we shall drive youff," said Dolokhov.
	"Only take care you and your Cossacks are not all captured!" saidhe French grenadier.
	The French onlookers and listeners laughed.
	"We'll make you dance as we did under Suvorov...,"* said Dolokhov.
	*"On vous fera danser."
	"Qu' est-ce qu'il chante?"* asked a Frenchman.
	*"What's he singing about?"
	"It's ancient history," said another, guessing that it referred to aormer war. "The Emperor will teach your Suvara as he has taught thethers..."
	"Bonaparte..." began Dolokhov, but the Frenchman interrupted him.
	"Not Bonaparte. He is the Emperor! Sacre nom...!" cried he angrily.
	"The devil skin your Emperor."
	And Dolokhov swore at him in coarse soldier's Russian andhouldering his musket walked away.
	"Let us go, Ivan Lukich," he said to the captain.
	"Ah, that's the way to talk French," said the picket soldiers. "Now,idorov, you have a try!"
	Sidorov, turning to the French, winked, and began to jabbereaningless sounds very fast: "Kari, mala, tafa, safi, muter,aska," he said, trying to give an expressive intonation to his voice.
	"Ho! ho! ho! Ha! ha! ha! ha! Ouh! ouh!" came peals of such healthynd good-humored laughter from the soldiers that it infected therench involuntarily, so much so that the only thing left to do seemedo be to unload the muskets, muskets, explode the ammunition, andll return home as quickly as possible.
	But the guns remained loaded, the loopholes in blockhouses andntrenchments looked out just as menacingly, and the unlimbered cannononfronted one another as before.BK2|CH16
	CHAPTER XVI
	Having ridden round the whole line from right flank to left,rince Andrew made his way up to the battery from which the stafffficer had told him the whole field could be seen. Here heismounted, and stopped beside the farthest of the four unlimberedannon. Before the guns an artillery sentry was pacing up and down; hetood at attention when the officer arrived, but at a sign resumed hiseasured, monotonous pacing. Behind the guns were their limbers andtill farther back picket ropes and artillerymen's bonfires. To theeft, not far from the farthest cannon, was a small, newly constructedattle shed from which came the sound of officers' voices in eageronversation.
	It was true that a view over nearly the whole Russian position andhe greater part of the enemy's opened out from this battery. Justacing it, on the crest of the opposite hill, the village of Schonrabern could be seen, and in three places to left and right therench troops amid the smoke of their campfires, the greater part ofhom were evidently in the village itself and behind the hill. Tohe left from that village, amid the smoke, was something resembling aattery, but it was impossible to see it clearly with the naked eye.ur right flank was posted on a rather steep incline which dominatedhe French position. Our infantry were stationed there, and at thearthest point the dragoons. In the center, where Tushin's batterytood and from which Prince Andrew was surveying the position, was theasiest and most direct descent and ascent to the brook separatings from Schon Grabern. On the left our troops were close to a copse,n which smoked the bonfires of our infantry who were felling wood.he French line was wider than ours, and it was plain that theyould easily outflank us on both sides. Behind our position was ateep and deep dip, making it difficult for artillery and cavalry toetire. Prince Andrew took out his notebook and, leaning on theannon, sketched a plan of the position. He made some notes on twooints, intending to mention them to Bagration. His idea was, first,o concentrate all the artillery in the center, and secondly, toithdraw the cavalry to the other side of the dip. Prince Andrew,eing always near the commander in chief, closely following the massovements and general orders, and constantly studying historicalccounts of battles, involuntarily pictured to himself the course ofvents in the forthcoming action in broad outline. He imagined onlymportant possibilities: "If the enemy attacks the right flank," heaid to himself, "the Kiev grenadiers and the Podolsk chasseurs mustold their position till reserves from the center come up. In thatase the dragoons could successfully make a flank counterattack. Ifhey attack our center we, having the center battery on this highround, shall withdraw the left flank under its cover, and retreato the dip by echelons." So he reasoned.... All the time he had beeneside the gun, he had heard the voices of the officers distinctly,ut as often happens had not understood a word of what they wereaying. Suddenly, however, he was struck by a voice coming from thehed, and its tone was so sincere that he could not but listen.
	"No, friend," said a pleasant and, as it seemed to Prince Andrew, familiar voice, "what I say is that if it were possible to know whats beyond death, none of us would be afraid of it. That's so, friend."
	Another, a younger voice, interrupted him: "Afraid or not, you can'tscape it anyhow."
	"All the same, one is afraid! Oh, you clever people," said a thirdanly voice interrupting them both. "Of course you artillery men areery wise, because you can take everything along with you- vodka andnacks."
	And the owner of the manly voice, evidently an infantry officer,aughed.
	"Yes, one is afraid," continued the first speaker, he of theamiliar voice. "One is afraid of the unknown, that's what it is.hatever we may say about the soul going to the sky... we know theres no sky but only an atmosphere."
	The manly voice again interrupted the artillery officer.
	"Well, stand us some of your herb vodka, Tushin," it said.
	"Why," thought Prince Andrew, "that's the captain who stood up inhe sutler's hut without his boots." He recognized the agreeable,hilosophizing voice with pleasure.
	"Some herb vodka? Certainly!" said Tushin. "But still, to conceive auture life..."
	He did not finish. Just then there was a whistle in the air;earer and nearer, faster and louder, louder and faster, a cannonall, as if it had not finished saying what was necessary, thuddednto the ground near the shed with super human force, throwing up aass of earth. The ground seemed to groan at the terrible impact.
	And immediately Tushin, with a short pipe in the corner of his mouthnd his kind, intelligent face rather pale, rushed out of the shedollowed by the owner of the manly voice, a dashing infantry officerho hurried off to his company, buttoning up his coat as he ran.BK2|CH17
	CHAPTER XVII
	Mounting his horse again Prince Andrew lingered with the battery,ooking at the puff from the gun that had sent the ball. His eyesan rapidly over the wide space, but he only saw that the hithertootionless masses of the French now swayed and that there really was aattery to their left. The smoke above it had not yet dispersed. Twoounted Frenchmen, probably adjutants, were galloping up the hill. Amall but distinctly visible enemy column was moving down the hill,robably to strengthen the front line. The smoke of the first shot hadot yet dispersed before another puff appeared, followed by aeport. The battle had begun! Prince Andrew turned his horse andalloped back to Grunth to find Prince Bagration. He heard theannonade behind him growing louder and more frequent. Evidently ouruns had begun to reply. From the bottom of the slope, where thearleys had taken place, came the report of musketry.
	Lemarrois had just arrived at a gallop with Bonaparte's sternetter, and Murat, humiliated and anxious to expiate his fault, had atnce moved his forces to attack the center and outflank both theussian wings, hoping before evening and before the arrival of themperor to crush the contemptible detachment that stood before him.
	"It has begun. Here it is!" thought Prince Andrew, feeling the bloodush to his heart. "But where and how will my Toulon present itself?"
	Passing between the companies that had been eating porridge andrinking vodka a quarter of an hour before, he saw everywhere the sameapid movement of soldiers forming ranks and getting their musketseady, and on all their faces he recognized the same eagerness thatilled his heart. "It has begun! Here it is, dreadful butnjoyable!" was what the face of each soldier and each officereemed to say.
	Before he had reached the embankments that were being thrown up,e saw, in the light of the dull autumn evening, mounted men comingoward him. The foremost, wearing a Cossack cloak and lambskin cap andiding a white horse, was Prince Bagration. Prince Andrew stopped,aiting for him to come up; Prince Bagration reined in his horse andecognizing Prince Andrew nodded to him. He still looked ahead whilerince Andrew told him what he had seen.
	The feeling, "It has begun! Here it is!" was seen even on Princeagration's hard brown face with its half-closed, dull, sleepy eyes.rince Andrew gazed with anxious curiosity at that impassive facend wished he could tell what, if anything, this man was thinkingnd feeling at that moment. "Is there anything at all behind thatmpassive face?" Prince Andrew asked himself as he looked. Princeagration bent his head in sign of agreement with what Prince Andrewold him, and said, "Very good!" in a tone that seemed to imply thatverything that took place and was reported to him was exactly what head foreseen. Prince Andrew, out of breath with his rapid ride,poke quickly. Prince Bagration, uttering his words with an Orientalccent, spoke particularly slowly, as if to impress the fact thathere was no need to hurry. However, he put his horse to a trot in theirection of Tushin's battery. Prince Andrew followed with theuite. Behind Prince Bagration rode an officer of the suite, therince's personal adjutant, Zherkov, an orderly officer, the stafffficer on duty, riding a fine bobtailed horse, and a civilian- anccountant who had asked permission to be present at the battle out ofuriosity. The accountant, a stout, full-faced man, looked aroundim with a naive smile of satisfaction and presented a strangeppearance among the hussars, Cossacks, and adjutants, in his camletoat, as he jolted on his horse with a convoy officer's saddle.
	"He wants to see a battle," said Zherkov to Bolkonski, pointing tohe accountant, "but he feels a pain in the pit of his stomachlready."
	"Oh, leave off!" said the accountant with a beaming but ratherunning smile, as if flattered at being made the subject ofherkov's joke, and purposely trying to appear stupider than he reallyas.
	"It is very strange, mon Monsieur Prince," said the staff officer.He remembered that in French there is some peculiar way of addressing prince, but could not get it quite right.)
	By this time they were all approaching Tushin's battery, and aall struck the ground in front of them.
	"What's that that has fallen?" asked the accountant with a naivemile.
	"A French pancake," answered Zherkov.
	"So that's what they hit with?" asked the accountant. "How awful!"
	He seemed to swell with satisfaction. He had hardly finishedpeaking when they again heard an unexpectedly violent whistling whichuddenly ended with a thud into something soft... f-f-flop! and aossack, riding a little to their right and behind the accountant,rashed to earth with his horse. Zherkov and the staff officer bentver their saddles and turned their horses away. The accountanttopped, facing the Cossack, and examined him with attentiveuriosity. The Cossack was dead, but the horse still struggled.
	Prince Bagration screwed up his eyes, looked round, and, seeinghe cause of the confusion, turned away with indifference, as if toay, "Is it worth while noticing trifles?" He reined in his horse withhe case of a skillful rider and, slightly bending over, disengagedis saber which had caught in his cloak. It was an old-fashioned saberf a kind no longer in general use. Prince Andrew remembered the storyf Suvorov giving his saber to Bagration in Italy, and theecollection was particularly pleasant at that moment. They hadeached the battery at which Prince Andrew had been when he examinedhe battlefield.
	"Whose company?" asked Prince Bagration of an artillerymantanding by the ammunition wagon.
	He asked, "Whose company?" but he really meant, "Are yourightened here?" and the artilleryman understood him.
	"Captain Tushin's, your excellency!" shouted the red-haired,reckled gunner in a merry voice, standing to attention.
	"Yes, yes," muttered Bagration as if considering something, and heode past the limbers to the farthest cannon.
	As he approached, a ringing shot issued from it deafening him andis suite, and in the smoke that suddenly surrounded the gun theyould see the gunners who had seized it straining to roll it quicklyack to its former position. A huge, broad-shouldered gunner, Numberne, holding a mop, his legs far apart, sprang to the wheel; whileumber Two with a trembling hand placed a charge in the cannon'south. The short, round-shouldered Captain Tushin, stumbling overhe tail of the gun carriage, moved forward and, not noticing theeneral, looked out shading his eyes with his small hand.
	"Lift it two lines more and it will be just right," cried he in aeeble voice to which he tried to impart a dashing note, ill suited tois weak figure. "Number Two!" he squeaked. "Fire, Medvedev!"
	Bagration called to him, and Tushin, raising three fingers to hisap with a bashful and awkward gesture not at all like a militaryalute but like a priest's benediction, approached the general. Thoughushin's guns had been intended to cannonade the valley, he was firingncendiary balls at the village of Schon Grabern visible justpposite, in front of which large masses of French were advancing.
	No one had given Tushin orders where and at what to fire, butfter consulting his sergeant major, Zakharchenko, for whom he hadreat respect, he had decided that it would be a good thing to setire to the village. "Very good!" said Bagration in reply to thefficer's report, and began deliberately to examine the wholeattlefield extended before him. The French had advanced nearest onur right. Below the height on which the Kiev regiment wastationed, in the hollow where the rivulet flowed, the soul-stirringolling and crackling of musketry was heard, and much farther to theight beyond the dragoons, the officer of the suite pointed out toagration a French column that was outflanking us. To the left theorizon bounded by the adjacent wood. Prince Bagration ordered twoattalions from the center to be sent to reinforce the right flank.he officer of the suite ventured to remark to the prince that ifhese battalions went away, the guns would remain without support.rince Bagration turned to the officer and with his dull eyes lookedt him in silence. It seemed to Prince Andrew that the officer'semark was just and that really no answer could be made to it. Butt that moment an adjutant galloped up with a message from theommander of the regiment in the hollow and news that immense massesf the French were coming down upon them and that his regiment wasn disorder and was retreating upon the Kiev grenadiers. Princeagration bowed his head in sign of assent and approval. He rode offt a walk to the right and sent an adjutant to the dragoons withrders to attack the French. But this adjutant returned half an hourater with the news that the commander of the dragoons had alreadyetreated beyond the dip in the ground, as a heavy fire had beenpened on him and he was losing men uselessly, and so had hastenedo throw some sharpshooters into the wood.
	"Very good!" said Bagration.
	As he was leaving the battery, firing was heard on the left also,nd as it was too far to the left flank for him to have time to gohere himself, Prince Bagration sent Zherkov to tell the general inommand (the one who had paraded his regiment before Kutuzov atraunau) that he must retreat as quickly as possible behind the hollown the rear, as the right flank would probably not be able toithstand the enemy's attack very long. About Tushin and the battalionhat had been in support of his battery all was forgotten. Princendrew listened attentively to Bagration's colloquies with theommanding officers and the orders he gave them and, to hisurprise, found that no orders were really given, but that Princeagration tried to make it appear that everything done by necessity,y accident, or by the will of subordinate commanders was done, if noty his direct command, at least in accord with his intentions.rince Andrew noticed, however, that though what happened was due tohance and was independent of the commander's will, owing to theact Bagration showed, his presence was very valuable. Officers whopproached him with disturbed countenances became calm; soldiers andfficers greeted him gaily, grew more cheerful in his presence, andere evidently anxious to display their courage before him.BK2|CH18
	CHAPTER XVIII
	Prince Bagration, having reached the highest point of our rightlank, began riding downhill to where the roll of musketry was heardut where on account of the smoke nothing could be seen. The nearerhey got to the hollow the less they could see but the more theyelt the nearness of the actual battlefield. They began to meetounded men. One with a bleeding head and no cap was being draggedlong by two soldiers who supported him under the arms. There was aurgle in his throat and he was spitting blood. A bullet had evidentlyit him in the throat or mouth. Another was walking sturdily byimself but without his musket, groaning aloud and swinging his armhich had just been hurt, while blood from it was streaming over hisreatcoat as from a bottle. He had that moment been wounded and hisace showed fear rather than suffering. Crossing a road they descended steep incline and saw several men lying on the ground; they also met crowd of soldiers some of whom were unwounded. The soldiers werescending the hill breathing heavily, and despite the general'sresence were talking loudly and gesticulating. In front of themows of gray cloaks were already visible through the smoke, and anfficer catching sight of Bagration rushed shouting after the crowd ofetreating soldiers, ordering them back. Bagration rode up to theanks along which shots crackled now here and now there, drowninghe sound of voices and the shouts of command. The whole air reekedith smoke. The excited faces of the soldiers were blackened witht. Some were using their ramrods, others putting powder on theouchpans or taking charges from their pouches, while others wereiring, though who they were firing at could not be seen for the smokehich there was no wind to carry away. A pleasant humming andhistling of bullets were often heard. "What is this?" thoughtrince Andrew approaching the crowd of soldiers. "It can't be anttack, for they are not moving; it can't be a square- for they areot drawn up for that."
	The commander of the regiment, a thin, feeble-looking old man with aleasant smile- his eyelids drooping more than half over his old eyes,iving him a mild expression, rode up to Bagration and welcomed him as host welcomes an honored guest. He reported that his regiment hadeen attacked by French cavalry and that, though the attack had beenepulsed, he had lost more than half his men. He said the attack hadeen repulsed, employing this military term to describe what hadccurred to his regiment, but in reality he did not himself knowhat had happened during that half-hour to the troops entrusted toim, and could not say with certainty whether the attack had beenepulsed or his regiment had been broken up. All he knew was that athe commencement of the action balls and shells began flying allver his regiment and hitting men and that afterwards someone hadhouted "Cavalry!" and our men had begun firing. They were stilliring, not at the cavalry which had disappeared, but at Frenchnfantry who had come into the hollow and were firing at our men.rince Bagration bowed his head as a sign that this was exactly whate had desired and expected. Turning to his adjutant he ordered him toring down the two battalions of the Sixth Chasseurs whom they hadust passed. Prince Andrew was struck by the changed expression onrince Bagration's face at this moment. It expressed theoncentrated and happy resolution you see on the face of a man whon a hot day takes a final run before plunging into the water. Theull, sleepy expression was no longer there, nor the affectation ofrofound thought. The round, steady, hawk's eyes looked before himagerly and rather disdainfully, not resting on anything althoughis movements were still slow and measured.
	The commander of the regiment turned to Prince Bagration, entreatingim to go back as it was too dangerous to remain where they were.Please, your excellency, for God's sake!" he kept saying, glancingor support at an officer of the suite who turned away from him.There, you see!" and he drew attention to the bullets whistling,inging, and hissing continually around them. He spoke in the tonef entreaty and reproach that a carpenter uses to a gentleman whoas picked up an ax: "We are used to it, but you, sir, will blisterour hands." He spoke as if those bullets could not kill him, andis half-closed eyes gave still more persuasiveness to his words.he staff officer joined in the colonel's appeals, but Bagration didot reply; he only gave an order to cease firing and re-form, so as toive room for the two approaching battalions. While he was speaking,he curtain of smoke that had concealed the hollow, driven by a risingind, began to move from right to left as if drawn by an invisibleand, and the hill opposite, with the French moving about on it,pened out before them. All eyes fastened involuntarily on this Frencholumn advancing against them and winding down over the uneven ground.ne could already see the soldiers' shaggy caps, distinguish thefficers from the men, and see the standard flapping against itstaff.
	"They march splendidly," remarked someone in Bagration's suite.
	The head of the column had already descended into the hollow. Thelash would take place on this side of it...
	The remains of our regiment which had been in action rapidlyormed up and moved to the right; from behind it, dispersing theaggards, came two battalions of the Sixth Chasseurs in fine order.efore they had reached Bagration, the weighty tread of the mass ofen marching in step could be heard. On their left flank, nearest toagration, marched a company commander, a fine round-faced man, with atupid and happy expression- the same man who had rushed out of theattle shed. At that moment he was clearly thinking of nothing but howashing a fellow he would appear as he passed the commander.
	With the self-satisfaction of a man on parade, he stepped lightlyith his muscular legs as if sailing along, stretching himself tois full height without the smallest effort, his ease contrasting withhe heavy tread of the soldiers who were keeping step with him. Hearried close to his leg a narrow unsheathed sword (small, curved, andot like a real weapon) and looked now at the superior officers andow back at the men without losing step, his whole powerful bodyurning flexibly. It was as if all the powers of his soul wereoncentrated on passing the commander in the best possible manner, andeeling that he was doing it well he was happy. "Left... left...eft..." he seemed to repeat to himself at each alternate step; and inime to this, with stern but varied faces, the wall of soldiersurdened with knapsacks and muskets marched in step, and each one ofhese hundreds of soldiers seemed to be repeating to himself at eachlternate step, "Left... left... left..." A fat major skirted aush, puffing and falling out of step; a soldier who had fallenehind, his face showing alarm at his defection, ran at a trot,anting to catch up with his company. A cannon ball, cleaving the air,lew over the heads of Bagration and his suite, and fell into theolumn to the measure of "Left... left!" "Close up!" came theompany commander's voice in jaunty tones. The soldiers passed in aemicircle round something where the ball had fallen, and an oldrooper on the flank, a noncommissioned officer who had stopped besidehe dead men, ran to catch up his line and, falling into step with aop, looked back angrily, and through the ominous silence and theegular tramp of feet beating the ground in unison, one seemed to heareft... left... left.
	"Well done, lads!" said Prince Bagration.
	"Glad to do our best, your ex'len-lency!" came a confused shout fromhe ranks. A morose soldier marching on the left turned his eyes onagration as he shouted, with an expression that seemed to say: "Wenow that ourselves!" Another, without looking round, as thoughearing to relax, shouted with his mouth wide open and passed on.
	The order was given to halt and down knapsacks.
	Bagration rode round the ranks that had marched past him andismounted. He gave the reins to a Cossack, took off and handed overis felt coat, stretched his legs, and set his cap straight. Theead of the French column, with its officers leading, appeared fromelow the hill.
	"Forward, with God!" said Bagration, in a resolute, sonorousoice, turning for a moment to the front line, and slightly swingingis arms, he went forward uneasily over the rough field with thewkward gait of a cavalryman. Prince Andrew felt that an invisibleower was leading him forward, and experienced great happiness.
	The French were already near. Prince Andrew, walking besideagration, could clearly distinguish their bandoliers, red epaulets,nd even their faces. (He distinctly saw an old French officer who,ith gaitered legs and turned-out toes, climbed the hill withifficulty.) Prince Bagration gave no further orders and silentlyontinued to walk on in front of the ranks. Suddenly one shot afternother rang out from the French, smoke appeared all along theirneven ranks, and musket shots sounded. Several of our men fell, amonghem the round-faced officer who had marched so gaily andomplacently. But at the moment the first report was heard,agration looked round and shouted, "Hurrah!"
	"Hurrah- ah!- ah!" rang a long-drawn shout from our ranks, andassing Bagration and racing one another they rushed in an irregularut joyous and eager crowd down the hill at their disordered foe.BK2|CH19
	CHAPTER XIX
	The attack of the Sixth Chasseurs secured the retreat of our rightlank. In the center Tushin's forgotten battery, which had managedo set fire to the Schon Grabern village, delayed the Frenchdvance. The French were putting out the fire which the wind waspreading, and thus gave us time to retreat. The retirement of theenter to the other side of the dip in the ground at the rear wasurried and noisy, but the different companies did not get mixed.ut our left- which consisted of the Azov and Podolsk infantry and theavlograd hussars- was simultaneously attacked and outflanked byuperior French forces under Lannes and was thrown into confusion.agration had sent Zherkov to the general commanding that left flankith orders to retreat immediately.
	Zherkov, not removing his hand from his cap, turned his horsebout and galloped off. But no sooner had he left Bagration than hisourage failed him. He was seized by panic and could not go where itas dangerous.
	Having reached the left flank, instead of going to the front wherehe firing was, he began to look for the general and his staff wherehey could not possibly be, and so did not deliver the order.
	The command of the left flank belonged by seniority to the commanderf the regiment Kutuzov had reviewed at Braunau and in whicholokhov was serving as a private. But the command of the extreme leftlank had been assigned to the commander of the Pavlograd regimentn which Rostov was serving, and a misunderstanding arose. The twoommanders were much exasperated with one another and, long afterhe action had begun on the right flank and the French were alreadydvancing, were engaged in discussion with the sole object offfending one another. But the regiments, both cavalry and infantry,ere by no means ready for the impending action. From privates toeneral they were not expecting a battle and were engaged ineaceful occupations, the cavalry feeding the horses and thenfantry collecting wood.
	"He higher iss dan I in rank," said the German colonel of theussars, flushing and addressing an adjutant who had ridden up, "soet him do what he vill, but I cannot sacrifice my hussars...ugler, sount ze retreat!"
	But haste was becoming imperative. Cannon and musketry, minglingogether, thundered on the right and in the center, while theapotes of Lannes' sharpshooters were already seen crossing theilldam and forming up within twice the range of a musket shot. Theeneral in command of the infantry went toward his horse with jerkyteps, and having mounted drew himself up very straight and tall andode to the Pavlograd commander. The commanders met with polite bowsut with secret malevolence in their hearts.
	"Once again, Colonel," said the general, "I can't leave half myen in the wood. I beg of you, I beg of you," he repeated, "toccupy the position and prepare for an attack."
	"I peg of you yourself not to mix in vot is not your business!"uddenly replied the irate colonel. "If you vere in the cavalry..."
	"I am not in the cavalry, Colonel, but I am a Russian general and ifou are not aware of the fact..."
	"Quite avare, your excellency," suddenly shouted the colonel,ouching his horse and turning purple in the face. "Vill you be sooot to come to ze front and see dat zis position iss no goot? I don'tish to destroy my men for your pleasure!"
	"You forget yourself, Colonel. I am not considering my ownleasure and I won't allow it to be said!"
	Taking the colonel's outburst as a challenge to his courage, theeneral expanded his chest and rode, frowning, beside him to the frontine, as if their differences would be settled there amongst theullets. They reached the front, several bullets sped over them, andhey halted in silence. There was nothing fresh to be seen from theine, for from where they had been before it had been evident thatt was impossible for cavalry to act among the bushes and brokenround, as well as that the French were outflanking our left. Theeneral and colonel looked sternly and significantly at one anotherike two fighting cocks preparing for battle, each vainly trying toetect signs of cowardice in the other. Both passed the examinationuccessfully. As there was nothing to said, and neither wished to giveccasion for it to be alleged that he had been the first to leavehe range of fire, they would have remained there for a long timeesting each other's courage had it not been that just then they heardhe rattle of musketry and a muffled shout almost behind them in theood. The French had attacked the men collecting wood in the copse. Itas no longer possible for the hussars to retreat with the infantry.hey were cut off from the line of retreat on the left by therench. However inconvenient the position, it was now necessary tottack in order to cut away through for themselves.
	The squadron in which Rostov was serving had scarcely time toount before it was halted facing the enemy. Again, as at the Ennsridge, there was nothing between the squadron and the enemy, andgain that terrible dividing line of uncertainty and fear-esembling the line separating the living from the dead- lay betweenhem. All were conscious of this unseen line, and the question whetherhey would they would cross it or not, and how they would cross it,gitated them all.
	The colonel rode to the front, angrily gave some reply touestions put to him by the officers, and, like a man desperatelynsisting on having his own way, gave an order. No one said anythingefinite, but the rumor of an attack spread through the squadron.he command to form up rang out and the sabers whizzed as they wererawn from their scabbards. Still no one moved. The troops of the leftlank, infantry and hussars alike, felt that the commander did notimself know what to do, and this irresolution communicated itselfo the men.
	"If only they would be quick!" thought Rostov, feeling that atast the time had come to experience the joy of an attack of whiche had so often heard from his fellow hussars.
	"Fo'ward, with God, lads!" rang out Denisov's voice. "At a twoto'ward!"
	The horses' croups began to sway in the front line. Rook pulled athe reins and started of his own accord.
	Before him, on the right, Rostov saw the front lines of hisussars and still farther ahead a dark line which he could not seeistinctly but took to be the enemy. Shots could be heard, but someay off.
	"Faster!" came the word of command, and Rostov felt Rook's flanksrooping as he broke into a gallop.
	Rostov anticipated his horse's movements and became more and morelated. He had noticed a solitary tree ahead of him. This tree hadeen in the middle of the line that had seemed so terrible- and now head crossed that line and not only was there nothing terrible, butverything was becoming more and more happy and animated. "Oh, how Iill slash at him!" thought Rostov, gripping the hilt of his saber.
	"Hur-a-a-a-ah!" came a roar of voices. "Let anyone come my way now,"hought Rostov driving his spurs into Rook and letting him go at aull gallop so that he outstripped the others. Ahead, the enemy waslready visible. Suddenly something like a birch broom seemed to sweepver the squadron. Rostov raised his saber, ready to strike, but athat instant the trooper Nikitenko, who was galloping ahead, shot awayrom him, and Rostov felt as in a dream that he continued to bearried forward with unnatural speed but yet stayed on the samepot. From behind him Bondarchuk, an hussar he knew, jolted againstim and looked angrily at him. Bondarchuk's horse swerved and gallopedast.
	"How is it I am not moving? I have fallen, I am killed!" Rostovsked and answered at the same instant. He was alone in the middlef a field. Instead of the moving horses and hussars' backs, he sawothing before him but the motionless earth and the stubble aroundim. There was warm blood under his arm. "No, I am wounded and theorse is killed." Rook tried to rise on his forelegs but fell back,inning his rider's leg. Blood was flowing from his head; he struggledut could not rise. Rostov also tried to rise but fell back, hisabretache having become entangled in the saddle. Where our menere, and where the French, he did not know. There was no one near.
	Having disentangled his leg, he rose. "Where, on which side, was nowhe line that had so sharply divided the two armies?" he asked himselfnd could not answer. "Can something bad have happened to me?" heondered as he got up: and at that moment he felt that somethinguperfluous was hanging on his benumbed left arm. The wrist felt as ift were not his. He examined his hand carefully, vainly trying to findlood on it. "Ah, here are people coming," he thought joyfully, seeingome men running toward him. "They will help me!" In front came aan wearing a strange shako and a blue cloak, swarthy, sunburned,nd with a hooked nose. Then came two more, and many more runningehind. One of them said something strange, not in Russian. In amonghe hindmost of these men wearing similar shakos was a Russian hussar.e was being held by the arms and his horse was being led behind him.
	"It must be one of ours, a prisoner. Yes. Can it be that they willake me too? Who are these men?" thought Rostov, scarcely believingis eyes. "Can they be French?" He looked at the approachingrenchmen, and though but a moment before he had been galloping to gett them and hack them to pieces, their proximity now seemed so awfulhat he could not believe his eyes. "Who are they? Why are theyunning? Can they be coming at me? And why? To kill me? Me whomveryone is so fond of?" He remembered his mother's love for him,nd his family's, and his friends', and the enemy's intention toill him seemed impossible. "But perhaps they may do it!" For morehan ten seconds he stood not moving from the spot or realizing theituation. The foremost Frenchman, the one with the hooked nose, waslready so close that the expression of his face could be seen. Andhe excited, alien face of that man, his bayonet hanging down, holdingis breath, and running so lightly, frightened Rostov. He seized hisistol and, instead of firing it, flung it at the Frenchman and ranith all his might toward the bushes. He did not now run with theeeling of doubt and conflict with which he had trodden the Ennsridge, but with the feeling of a hare fleeing from the hounds. Oneingle sentiment, that of fear for his young and happy life, possessedis whole being. Rapidly leaping the furrows, he fled across the fieldith the impetuosity he used to show at catchplay, now and thenurning his good-natured, pale, young face to look back. A shudderf terror went through him: "No, better not look," he thought, butaving reached the bushes he glanced round once more. The French hadallen behind, and just as he looked round the first man changed hisun to a walk and, turning, shouted something loudly to a comradearther back. Rostov paused. "No, there's some mistake," thought he.They can't have wanted to kill me." But at the same time, his leftrm felt as heavy as if a seventy-pound weight were tied to it. Heould run no more. The Frenchman also stopped and took aim. Rostovlosed his eyes and stooped down. One bullet and then another whistledast him. He mustered his last remaining strength, took hold of hiseft hand with his right, and reached the bushes. Behind these wereome Russian sharpshooters.BK2|CH20
	CHAPTER XX
	The infantry regiments that had been caught unawares in theutskirts of the wood ran out of it, the different companies gettingixed, and retreated as a disorderly crowd. One soldier, in hisear, uttered the senseless cry, "Cut off!" that is so terrible inattle, and that word infected the whole crowd with a feeling ofanic.
	"Surrounded! Cut off? We're lost!" shouted the fugitives.
	The moment he heard the firing and the cry from behind, theeneral realized that something dreadful had happened to his regiment,nd the thought that he, an exemplary officer of many years' serviceho had never been to blame, might be held responsible at headquartersor negligence or inefficiency so staggered him that, forgetting theecalcitrant cavalry colonel, his own dignity as a general, andbove all quite forgetting the danger and all regard forelf-preservation, he clutched the crupper of his saddle and, spurringis horse, galloped to the regiment under a hail of bullets which fellround, but fortunately missed him. His one desire was to know whatas happening and at any cost correct, or remedy, the mistake if head made one, so that he, an exemplary officer of twenty-two years'ervice, who had never been censured, should not be held to blame.
	Having galloped safely through the French, he reached a field behindhe copse across which our men, regardless of orders, were running andescending the valley. That moment of moral hesitation which decideshe fate of battles had arrived. Would this disorderly crowd ofoldiers attend to the voice of their commander, or would they,isregarding him, continue their flight? Despite his desperatehouts that used to seem so terrible to the soldiers, despite hisurious purple countenance distorted out of all likeness to his formerelf, and the flourishing of his saber, the soldiers all continuedo run, talking, firing into the air, and disobeying orders. The moralesitation which decided the fate of battles was evidently culminatingn a panic.
	The general had a fit of coughing as a result of shouting and of theowder smoke and stopped in despair. Everything seemed lost. But athat moment the French who were attacking, suddenly and without anypparent reason, ran back and disappeared from the outskirts, andussian sharpshooters showed themselves in the copse. It wasimokhin's company, which alone had maintained its order in the woodnd, having lain in ambush in a ditch, now attacked the Frenchnexpectedly. Timokhin, armed only with a sword, had rushed at thenemy with such a desperate cry and such mad, drunken determinationhat, taken by surprise, the French had thrown down their musketsnd run. Dolokhov, running beside Timokhin, killed a Frenchman atlose quarters and was the first to seize the surrendering Frenchfficer by his collar. Our fugitives returned, the battalionse-formed, and the French who had nearly cut our left flank in halfere for the moment repulsed. Our reserve units were able to joinp, and the fight was at an end. The regimental commander and Majorkonomov had stopped beside a bridge, letting the retreating companiesass by them, when a soldier came up and took hold of theommander's stirrup, almost leaning against him. The man was wearing aluish coat of broadcloth, he had no knapsack or cap, his head wasandaged, and over his shoulder a French munition pouch was slung.e had an officer's sword in his hand. The soldier was pale, hislue eyes looked impudently into the commander's face, and his lipsere smiling. Though the commander was occupied in giving instructionso Major Ekonomov, he could not help taking notice of the soldier.
	"Your excellency, here are two trophies," said Dolokhov, pointing tohe French sword and pouch. "I have taken an officer prisoner. Itopped the company." Dolokhov breathed heavily from weariness andpoke in abrupt sentences. "The whole company can bear witness. Ieg you will remember this, your excellency!"
	"All right, all right," replied the commander, and turned to Majorkonomov.
	But Dolokhov did not go away; he untied the handkerchief aroundis head, pulled it off, and showed the blood congealed on his hair.
	"A bayonet wound. I remained at the front. Remember, yourxcellency!"
	Tushin's battery had been forgotten and only at the very end ofhe action did Prince Bagration, still hearing the cannonade in theenter, send his orderly staff officer, and later Prince Andrewlso, to order the battery to retire as quickly as possible. Whenhe supports attached to Tushin's battery had been moved away in theiddle of the action by someone's order, the battery had continuediring and was only not captured by the French because the enemy couldot surmise that anyone could have the effrontery to continue firingrom four quite undefended guns. On the contrary, the energetic actionf that battery led the French to suppose that here- in the center-he main Russian forces were concentrated. Twice they had attempted tottack this point, but on each occasion had been driven back byrapeshot from the four isolated guns on the hillock.
	Soon after Prince Bagration had left him, Tushin had succeeded inetting fire to Schon Grabern.
	"Look at them scurrying! It's burning! Just see the smoke! Fine!rand! Look at the smoke, the smoke!" exclaimed the artillerymen,rightening up.
	All the guns, without waiting for orders, were being fired in theirection of the conflagration. As if urging each other on, theoldiers cried at each shot: "Fine! That's good! Look at it... Grand!"he fire, fanned by the breeze, was rapidly spreading. The Frencholumns that had advanced beyond the village went back; but ashough in revenge for this failure, the enemy placed ten guns to theight of the village and began firing them at Tushin's battery.
	In their childlike glee, aroused by the fire and their luck inuccessfully cannonading the French, our artillerymen only noticedhis battery when two balls, and then four more, fell among ouruns, one knocking over two horses and another tearing off aunition-wagon driver's leg. Their spirits once roused were,owever, not diminished, but only changed character. The horses wereeplaced by others from a reserve gun carriage, the wounded werearried away, and the four guns were turned against the ten-gunattery. Tushin's companion officer had been killed at the beginningf the engagement and within an hour seventeen of the forty men of theuns' crews had been disabled, but the artillerymen were still aserry and lively as ever. Twice they noticed the French appearingelow them, and then they fired grapeshot at them.
	Little Tushin, moving feebly and awkwardly, kept telling his orderlyo "refill my pipe for that one!" and then, scattering sparks from it,an forward shading his eyes with his small hand to look at therench.
	"Smack at 'em, lads!" he kept saying, seizing the guns by the wheelsnd working the screws himself.
	Amid the smoke, deafened by the incessant reports which alwaysade him jump, Tushin not taking his pipe from his mouth ran fromun to gun, now aiming, now counting the charges, now giving ordersbout replacing dead or wounded horses and harnessing fresh ones,nd shouting in his feeble voice, so high pitched and irresolute.is face grew more and more animated. Only when a man was killed orounded did he frown and turn away from the sight, shouting angrily athe men who, as is always the case, hesitated about lifting thenjured or dead. The soldiers, for the most part handsome fellows and,s is always the case in an artillery company, a head and shouldersaller and twice as broad as their officer- all looked at theirommander like children in an embarrassing situation, and thexpression on his face was invariably reflected on theirs.
	Owing to the terrible uproar and the necessity for concentration andctivity, Tushin did not experience the slightest unpleasant sensef fear, and the thought that he might be killed or badly woundedever occurred to him. On the contrary, he became more and morelated. It seemed to him that it was a very long time ago, almost aay, since he had first seen the enemy and fired the first shot, andhat the corner of the field he stood on was well-known and familiarround. Though he thought of everything, considered everything, andid everything the best of officers could do in his position, he wasn a state akin to feverish delirium or drunkenness.
	From the deafening sounds of his own guns around him, the whistlend thud of the enemy's cannon balls, from the flushed anderspiring faces of the crew bustling round the guns, from the sightf the blood of men and horses, from the little puffs of smoke onhe enemy's side (always followed by a ball flying past and strikinghe earth, a man, a gun, a horse), from the sight of all thesehings a fantastic world of his own had taken possession of hisrain and at that moment afforded him pleasure. The enemy's gunsere in his fancy not guns but pipes from which occasional puffsere blown by an invisible smoker.
	"There... he's puffing again," muttered Tushin to himself, as amall cloud rose from the hill and was borne in a streak to the lefty the wind.
	"Now look out for the ball... we'll throw it back."
	"What do you want, your honor?" asked an artilleryman, standinglose by, who heard him muttering.
	"Nothing... only a shell..." he answered.
	"Come along, our Matvevna!" he said to himself. "Matvevna"* washe name his fancy gave to the farthest gun of the battery, whichas large and of an old pattern. The French swarming round theiruns seemed to him like ants. In that world, the handsome drunkardumber One of the second gun's crew was "uncle"; Tushin looked atim more often than at anyone else and took delight in his everyovement. The sound of musketry at the foot of the hill, nowiminishing, now increasing, seemed like someone's breathing. Heistened intently to the ebb and flow of these sounds.
	*Daughter of Matthew.
	"Ah! Breathing again, breathing!" he muttered to himself.
	He imagined himself as an enormously tall, powerful man who washrowing cannon balls at the French with both hands.
	"Now then, Matvevna, dear old lady, don't let me down!" he wasaying as he moved from the gun, when a strange, unfamiliar voicealled above his head: "Captain Tushin! Captain!"
	Tushin turned round in dismay. It was the staff officer who hadurned him out of the booth at Grunth. He was shouting in a gaspingoice:
	"Are you mad? You have twice been ordered to retreat, and you..."
	"Why are they down on me?" thought Tushin, looking in alarm at hisuperior.
	"I... don't..." he muttered, holding up two fingers to his cap.I..."
	But the staff officer did not finish what he wanted to say. A cannonall, flying close to him, caused him to duck and bend over his horse.e paused, and just as he was about to say something more, anotherall stopped him. He turned his horse and galloped off.
	"Retire! All to retire!" he shouted from a distance.
	The soldiers laughed. A moment later, an adjutant arrived with theame order.
	It was Prince Andrew. The first thing he saw on riding up to thepace where Tushin's guns were stationed was an unharnessed horse with broken leg, that lay screaming piteously beside the harnessedorses. Blood was gushing from its leg as from a spring. Among theimbers lay several dead men. One ball after another passed over as hepproached and he felt a nervous shudder run down his spine. But theere thought of being afraid roused him again. "I cannot be afraid,"hought he, and dismounted slowly among the guns. He delivered therder and did not leave the battery. He decided to have the gunsemoved from their positions and withdrawn in his presence. Togetherith Tushin, stepping across the bodies and under a terrible fire fromhe French, he attended to the removal of the guns.
	"A staff officer was here a minute ago, but skipped off," said anrtilleryman to Prince Andrew. "Not like your honor!"
	Prince Andrew said nothing to Tushin. They were both so busy as toeem not to notice one another. When having limbered up the only twoannon that remained uninjured out of the four, they began moving downhe hill (one shattered gun and one unicorn were left behind),rince Andrew rode up to Tushin.
	"Well, till we meet again..." he said, holding out his hand toushin.
	"Good-by, my dear fellow," said Tushin. "Dear soul! Good-by, my dearellow!" and for some unknown reason tears suddenly filled his eyes.BK2|CH21
	CHAPTER XXI
	The wind had fallen and black clouds, merging with the powder smoke,ung low over the field of battle on the horizon. It was growingark and the glow of two conflagrations was the more conspicuous.he cannonade was dying down, but the rattle of musketry behind and onhe right sounded oftener and nearer. As soon as Tushin with his guns,ontinually driving round or coming upon wounded men, was out of rangef fire and had descended into the dip, he was met by some of thetaff, among them the staff officer and Zherkov, who had been twiceent to Tushin's battery but had never reached it. Interrupting onenother, they all gave, and transmitted, orders as to how toroceed, reprimanding and reproaching him. Tushin gave no orders, and,ilently- fearing to speak because at every word he felt ready to weepithout knowing why- rode behind on his artillery nag. Though therders were to abandon the wounded, many of them dragged themselvesfter troops and begged for seats on the gun carriages. The jauntynfantry officer who just before the battle had rushed out of Tushin'sattle shed was laid, with a bullet in his stomach, on "Matvevna's"arriage. At the foot of the hill, a pale hussar cadet, supporting oneand with the other, came up to Tushin and asked for a seat.
	"Captain, for God's sake! I've hurt my arm," he said timidly. "Forod's sake... I can't walk. For God's sake!"
	It was plain that this cadet had already repeatedly asked for a liftnd been refused. He asked in a hesitating, piteous voice.
	"Tell them to give me a seat, for God's sake!"
	"Give him a seat," said Tushin. "Lay a cloak for him to sit on,ad," he said, addressing his favorite soldier. "And where is theounded officer?"
	"He has been set down. He died," replied someone.
	"Help him up. Sit down, dear fellow, sit down! Spread out the cloak,ntonov."
	The cadet was Rostov. With one hand he supported the other; he wasale and his jaw trembled, shivering feverishly. He was placed onMatvevna," the gun from which they had removed the dead officer.he cloak they spread under him was wet with blood which stained hisreeches and arm.
	"What, are you wounded, my lad?" said Tushin, approaching the gun onhich Rostov sat.
	"No, it's a sprain."
	"Then what is this blood on the gun carriage?" inquired Tushin.
	"It was the officer, your honor, stained it," answered thertilleryman, wiping away the blood with his coat sleeve, as ifpologizing for the state of his gun.
	It was all that they could do to get the guns up the rise aided byhe infantry, and having reached the village of Gruntersdorf theyalted. It had grown so dark that one could not distinguish theniforms ten paces off, and the firing had begun to subside. Suddenly,ear by on the right, shouting and firing were again heard. Flashes ofhot gleamed in the darkness. This was the last French attack andas met by soldiers who had sheltered in the village houses. Theyll rushed out of the village again, but Tushin's guns could not move,nd the artillerymen, Tushin, and the cadet exchanged silent glancess they awaited their fate. The firing died down and soldiers, talkingagerly, streamed out of a side street.
	"Not hurt, Petrov?" asked one.
	"We've given it 'em hot, mate! They won't make another push now,"aid another.
	"You couldn't see a thing. How they shot at their own fellows!othing could be seen. Pitch-dark, brother! Isn't there something torink?"
	The French had been repulsed for the last time. And again andgain in the complete darkness Tushin's guns moved forward, surroundedy the humming infantry as by a frame.
	In the darkness, it seemed as though a gloomy unseen river waslowing always in one direction, humming with whispers and talk andhe sound of hoofs and wheels. Amid the general rumble, the groans andoices of the wounded were more distinctly heard than any otheround in the darkness of the night. The gloom that enveloped thermy was filled with their groans, which seemed to melt into oneith the darkness of the night. After a while the moving mass becamegitated, someone rode past on a white horse followed by his suite,nd said something in passing: "What did he say? Where to, now?alt, is it? Did he thank us?" came eager questions from all sides.he whole moving mass began pressing closer together and a reportpread that they were ordered to halt: evidently those in front hadalted. All remained where they were in the middle of the muddy road.
	Fires were lighted and the talk became more audible. Captain Tushin,aving given orders to his company, sent a soldier to find aressing station or a doctor for the cadet, and sat down by aonfire the soldiers had kindled on the road. Rostov, too, draggedimself to the fire. From pain, cold, and damp, a feverish shiveringhook his whole body. Drowsiness was irresistibly mastering him, bute kept awake kept awake by an excruciating pain in his arm, for whiche could find no satisfactory position. He kept closing his eyes andhen again looking at the fire, which seemed to him dazzlingly red,nd at the feeble, round-shouldered figure of Tushin who was sittingross-legged like a Turk beside him. Tushin's large, kind, intelligentyes were fixed with sympathy and commiseration on Rostov, who sawhat Tushin with his whole heart wished to help him but could not.
	From all sides were heard the footsteps and talk of the infantry,ho were walking, driving past, and settling down all around. Theound of voices, the tramping feet, the horses' hoofs moving in mud,he crackling of wood fires near and afar, merged into one tremulousumble.
	It was no longer, as before, a dark, unseen river flowing throughhe gloom, but a dark sea swelling and gradually subsiding after atorm. Rostov looked at and listened listlessly to what passedefore and around him. An infantryman came to the fire, squatted onis heels, held his hands to the blaze, and turned away his face.
	"You don't mind your honor?" he asked Tushin. "I've lost my company,our honor. I don't know where... such bad luck!"
	With the soldier, an infantry officer with a bandaged cheek camep to the bonfire, and addressing Tushin asked him to have the gunsoved a trifle to let a wagon go past. After he had gone, two soldiersushed to the campfire. They were quarreling and fighting desperately,ach trying to snatch from the other a boot they were both holdingn to.
	"You picked it up?... I dare say! You're very smart!" one of themhouted hoarsely.
	Then a thin, pale soldier, his neck bandaged with a bloodstained legand, came up and in angry tones asked the artillerymen for water.
	"Must one die like a dog?" said he.
	Tushin told them to give the man some water. Then a cheerful soldieran up, begging a little fire for the infantry.
	"A nice little hot torch for the infantry! Good luck to you,ellow countrymen. Thanks for the fire- we'll return it withnterest," said he, carrying away into the darkness a glowing stick.
	Next came four soldiers, carrying something heavy on a cloak, andassed by the fire. One of them stumbled.
	"Who the devil has put the logs on the road?" snarled he.
	"He's dead- why carry him?" said another.
	"Shut up!"
	And they disappeared into the darkness with with their load.
	"Still aching?" Tushin asked Rostov in a whisper.
	"Yes."
	"Your honor, you're wanted by the general. He is in the hut here,"aid a gunner, coming up to Tushin.
	"Coming, friend."
	Tushin rose and, buttoning his greatcoat and pulling it straight,alked away from the fire.
	Not far from the artillery campfire, in a hut that had been preparedor him, Prince Bagration sat at dinner, talking with someommanding officers who had gathered at his quarters. The little oldan with the half-closed eyes was there greedily gnawing a muttonone, and the general who had served blamelessly for twenty-two years,lushed by a glass of vodka and the dinner; and the staff officer withhe signet ring, and Zherkov, uneasily glancing at them all, andrince Andrew, pale, with compressed lips and feverishly glitteringyes.
	In a corner of the hut stood a standard captured from the French,nd the accountant with the naive face was feeling its texture,haking his head in perplexity- perhaps because the banner reallynterested him, perhaps because it was hard for him, hungry as he was,o look on at a dinner where there was no place for him. In the nextut there was a French colonel who had been taken prisoner by ourragoons. Our officers were flocking in to look at him. Princeagration was thanking the individual commanders and inquiring intoetails of the action and our losses. The general whose regiment hadeen inspected at Braunau was informing the prince that as soon as thection began he had withdrawn from the wood, mustered the men who wereoodcutting, and, allowing the French to pass him, had made aayonet charge with two battalions and had broken up the Frenchroops.
	"When I saw, your excellency, that their first battalion wasisorganized, I stopped in the road and thought: 'I'll let them comen and will meet them with the fire of the whole battalion'- andhat's what I did."
	The general had so wished to do this and was so sorry he had notanaged to do it that it seemed to him as if it had really happened.erhaps it might really have been so? Could one possibly make out amidll that confusion what did or did not happen?
	"By the way, your excellency, I should inform you," he continued-emembering Dolokhov's conversation with Kutuzov and his lastnterview with the gentleman-ranker- "that Private Dolokhov, who waseduced to the ranks, took a French officer prisoner in my presencend particularly distinguished himself."
	"I saw the Pavlograd hussars attack there, your excellency,"himed in Zherkov, looking uneasily around. He had not seen theussars all that day, but had heard about them from an infantryfficer. "They broke up two squares, your excellency."
	Several of those present smiled at Zherkov's words, expecting one ofis usual jokes, but noticing that what he was saying redounded to thelory of our arms and of the day's work, they assumed a seriousxpression, though many of them knew that what he was saying was a lieevoid of any foundation. Prince Bagration turned to the old colonel:
	"Gentlemen, I thank you all; all arms have behaved heroically:nfantry, cavalry, and artillery. How was it that two guns werebandoned in the center?" he inquired, searching with his eyes foromeone. (Prince Bagration did not ask about the guns on the leftlank; he knew that all the guns there had been abandoned at theery beginning of the action.) "I think I sent you?" he added, turningo the staff officer on duty.
	"One was damaged," answered the staff officer, "and the other Ian't understand. I was there all the time giving orders and hadnly just left.... It is true that it was hot there," he added,odestly.
	Someone mentioned that Captain Tushin was bivouacking close to theillage and had already been sent for.
	"Oh, but you were there?" said Prince Bagration, addressing Princendrew.
	"Of course, we only just missed one another," said the stafffficer, with a smile to Bolkonski.
	"I had not the pleasure of seeing you," said Prince Andrew, coldlynd abruptly.
	All were silent. Tushin appeared at the threshold and made his wayimidly from behind the backs of the generals. As he stepped pasthe generals in the crowded hut, feeling embarrassed as he alwaysas by the sight of his superiors, he did not notice the staff ofhe banner and stumbled over it. Several of those present laughed.
	"How was it a gun was abandoned?" asked Bagration, frowning, noto much at the captain as at those who were laughing, among whomherkov laughed loudest.
	Only now, when he was confronted by the stern authorities, did hisuilt and the disgrace of having lost two guns and yet remaining aliveresent themselves to Tushin in all their horror. He had been soxcited that he had not thought about it until that moment. Thefficers' laughter confused him still more. He stood beforeagration with his lower jaw trembling and was hardly able toutter: "I don't know... your excellency... I had no men... yourxcellency."
	"You might have taken some from the covering troops."
	Tushin did not say that there were no covering troops, though thatas perfectly true. He was afraid of getting some other officer intorouble, and silently fixed his eyes on Bagration as a schoolboy whoas blundered looks at an examiner.
	The silence lasted some time. Prince Bagration, apparently notishing to be severe, found nothing to say; the others did not ventureo intervene. Prince Andrew looked at Tushin from under his browsnd his fingers twitched nervously.
	"Your excellency!" Prince Andrew broke the silence with his abruptoice," you were pleased to send me to Captain Tushin's battery. Ient there and found two thirds of the men and horses knocked out, twouns smashed, and no supports at all."
	Prince Bagration and Tushin looked with equal intentness atolkonski, who spoke with suppressed agitation.
	"And, if your excellency will allow me to express my opinion," heontinued, "we owe today's success chiefly to the action of thatattery and the heroic endurance of Captain Tushin and his company,"nd without awaiting a reply, Prince Andrew rose and left the table.
	Prince Bagration looked at Tushin, evidently reluctant to showistrust in Bolkonski's emphatic opinion yet not feeling able fully toredit it, bent his head, and told Tushin that he could go. Princendrew went out with him.
	"Thank you; you saved me, my dear fellow!" said Tushin.
	Prince Andrew gave him a look, but said nothing and went away. Heelt sad and depressed. It was all so strange, so unlike what he hadoped.
	"Who are they? Why are they here? What do they want? And when willll this end?" thought Rostov, looking at the changing shadowsefore him. The pain in his arm became more and more intense.rresistible drowsiness overpowered him, red rings danced before hisyes, and the impression of those voices and faces and a sense ofoneliness merged with the physical pain. It was they, these soldiers-ounded and unwounded- it was they who were crushing, weighing down,nd twisting the sinews and scorching the flesh of his sprained armnd shoulder. To rid himself of them he closed his eyes.
	For a moment he dozed, but in that short interval innumerable thingsppeared to him in a dream: his mother and her large white hand,onya's thin little shoulders, Natasha's eyes and laughter, Denisovith his voice and mustache, and Telyanin and all that affair withelyanin and Bogdanich. That affair was the same thing as this soldierith the harsh voice, and it was that affair and this soldier thatere so agonizingly, incessantly pulling and pressing his arm andlways dragging it in one direction. He tried to get away from them,ut they would not for an instant let his shoulder move a hair'sreadth. It would not ache- it would be well- if only they did notull it, but it was immpossible to get rid of them.
	He opened his eyes and looked up. The black canopy of night hungess than a yard above the glow of the charcoal. Flakes of fallingnow were fluttering in that light. Tushin had not returned, theoctor had not come. He was alone now, except for a soldier who wasitting naked at the other side of the fire, warming his thin yellowody.
	"Nobody wants me!" thought Rostov. "There is no one to help me ority me. Yet I was once at home, strong, happy, and loved." Heighed and, doing so, groaned involuntarily.
	"Eh, is anything hurting you?" asked the soldier, shaking hishirt out over the fire, and not waiting for an answer he gave a gruntnd added: "What a lot of men have been crippled today- frightful!"
	Rostov did not listen to the soldier. He looked at the snowflakesluttering above the fire and remembered a Russian winter at his warm,right home, his fluffy fur coat, his quickly gliding sleigh, hisealthy body, and all the affection and care of his family. "And whyid I come here?" he wondered.
	Next day the French army did not renew their attack, and the remnantf Bagration's detachment was reunited to Kutuzov's army.BK3	                              BOOK THREE: 1805BK3|CH1
	CHAPTER I
	Prince Vasili was not a man who deliberately thought out hislans. Still less did he think of injuring anyone for his owndvantage. He was merely a man of the world who had got on and to whometting on had become a habit. Schemes and devices for which heever rightly accounted to himself, but which formed the wholenterest of his life, were constantly shaping themselves in hisind, arising from the circumstances and persons he met. Of theselans he had not merely one or two in his head but dozens, some onlyeginning to form themselves, some approaching achievement, and somen course of disintegration. He did not, for instance, say to himself:This man now has influence, I must gain his confidence and friendshipnd through him obtain a special grant." Nor did he say to himself:Pierre is a rich man, I must entice him to marry my daughter and lende the forty thousand rubles I need." But when he came across camecross a man of position his instinct immediately told him that thisan could be useful, and without any premeditation Prince Vasiliook the first opportunity to gain his confidence, flatter him, becomentimate with him, and finally make his request.
	He had Pierre at hand in Moscow and procured for him anppointment as Gentleman of the Bedchamber, which at that timeonferred the status of Councilor of State, and insisted on theoung man accompanying him to Petersburg and staying at his house.ith apparent absent-mindedness, yet with unhesitating assurancehat he was doing the right thing, Prince Vasili did everything to getierre to marry his daughter. Had he thought out his planseforehand he could not have been so natural and shown such unaffectedamiliarity in intercourse with everybody both above and below himn social standing. Something always drew him toward those richernd more powerful than himself and he had rare skill in seizing theost opportune moment for making use of people.
	Pierre, on unexpectedly becoming Count Bezukhov and a rich man, feltimself after his recent loneliness and freedom from cares so besetnd preoccupied that only in bed was he able to be by himself. Head to sign papers, to present himself at government offices, theurpose of which was not clear to him, to question his chiefteward, to visit his estate near Moscow, and to receive many peopleho formerly did not even wish to know of his existence but wouldow have been offended and grieved had he chosen not to see them.hese different people- businessmen, relations, and acquaintanceslike- were all disposed to treat the young heir in the mostriendly and flattering manner: they were all evidently firmlyonvinced of Pierre's noble qualities. He was always hearing suchords as: "With your remarkable kindness," or, "With your excellenteart," "You are yourself so honorable Count," or, "Were he aslever as you," and so on, till he began sincerely to believe in hiswn exceptional kindness and extraordinary intelligence, the more sos in the depth of his heart it had always seemed to him that heeally was very kind and intelligent. Even people who had formerlyeen spiteful toward him and evidently unfriendly now became gentlend affectionate. The angry eldest princess, with the long waist andair plastered down like a doll's, had come into Pierre's room afterhe funeral. With drooping eyes and frequent blushes she told himhe was very sorry about their past misunderstandings and did notow feel she had a right to ask him for anything, except only forermission, after the blow she had received, to remain for a few weeksonger in the house she so loved and where she had sacrificed so much.he could not refrain from weeping at these words. Touched that thistatuesque princess could so change, Pierre took her hand and beggeder forgiveness, without knowing what for. From that day the eldestrincess quite changed toward Pierre and began knitting a stripedcarf for him.
	"Do this for my sake, mon cher; after all, she had to put up with great deal from the deceased," said Prince Vasili to him, handingim a deed to sign for the princess' benefit.
	Prince Vasili had come to the conclusion that it was necessary tohrow this bone- a bill for thirty thousand rubles- to the poorrincess that it might not occur to her to speak of his share in theffair of the inlaid portfolio. Pierre signed the deed and afterhat the princess grew still kinder. The younger sisters also becameffectionate to him, especially the youngest, the pretty one withhe mole, who often made him feel confused by her smiles and her ownonfusion when meeting him.
	It seemed so natural to Pierre that everyone should like him, and itould have seemed so unnatural had anyone disliked him, that heould not but believe in the sincerity of those around him. Besides,e had no time to ask himself whether these people were sincere orot. He was always busy and always felt in a state of mild andheerful intoxication. He felt as though he were the center of somemportant and general movement; that something was constantly expectedf him, that if he did not do it he would grieve and disappoint manyeople, but if he did this and that, all would be well; and he didhat was demanded of him, but still that happy result alwaysemained in the future.
	More than anyone else, Prince Vasili took possession of Pierre'sffairs and of Pierre himself in those early days. From the death ofount Bezukhov he did not let go his hold of the lad. He had the airf a man oppressed by business, weary and suffering, who yet wouldot, for pity's sake, leave this helpless youth who, after all, washe son of his old friend and the possessor of such enormous wealth,o the caprice of fate and the designs of rogues. During the feways he spent in Moscow after the death of Count Bezukhov, he wouldall Pierre, or go to him himself, and tell him what ought to beone in a tone of weariness and assurance, as if he were addingvery time: "You know I am overwhelmed with business and it isurely out of charity that I trouble myself about you, and you alsonow quite well that what I propose is the only thing possible."
	"Well, my dear fellow, tomorrow we are off at last," said Princeasili one day, closing his eyes and fingering Pierre's elbow,peaking as if he were saying something which had long since beengreed upon and could not now be altered. "We start tomorrow and I'miving you a place in my carriage. I am very glad. All our importantusiness here is now settled, and I ought to have been off long ago.ere is something I have received from the chancellor. I asked him forou, and you have been entered in the diplomatic corps and made aentleman of the Bedchamber. The diplomatic career now lies openefore you."
	Notwithstanding the tone of wearied assurance with which these wordsere pronounced, Pierre, who had so long been considering hisareer, wished to make some suggestion. But Prince Vasilinterrupted him in the special deep cooing tone, precluding theossibility of interrupting his speech, which he used in extreme caseshen special persuasion was needed.
	"Mais, mon cher, I did this for my own sake, to satisfy myonscience, and there is nothing to thank me for. No one has everomplained yet of being too much loved; and besides, you are free, youould throw it up tomorrow. But you will see everything for yourselfhen you get to Petersburg. It is high time for you to get away fromhese terrible recollections." Prince Vasili sighed. "Yes, yes, myoy. And my valet can go in your carriage. Ah! I was nearlyorgetting," he added. "You know, mon cher, your father and I had someccounts to settle, so I have received what was due from the Ryazanstate and will keep it; you won't require it. We'll go into theccounts later."
	By "what was due from the Ryazan estate" Prince Vasili meant severalhousand rubles quitrent received from Pierre's peasants, which therince had retained for himself.
	In Petersburg, as in Moscow, Pierre found the same atmosphere ofentleness and affection. He could not refuse the post, or ratherhe rank (for he did nothing), that Prince Vasili had procured forim, and acquaintances, invitations, and social occupations were soumerous that, even more than in Moscow, he felt a sense ofewilderment, bustle, and continual expectation of some good, alwaysn front of him but never attained.
	Of his former bachelor acquaintances many were no longer inetersburg. The Guards had gone to the front; Dolokhov had beeneduced to the ranks; Anatole was in the army somewhere in therovinces; Prince Andrew was abroad; so Pierre had not the opportunityo spend his nights as he used to like to spend them, or to open hisind by intimate talks with a friend older than himself and whom heespected. His whole time was taken up with dinners and balls andas spent chiefly at Prince Vasili's house in the company of the stoutrincess, his wife, and his beautiful daughter Helene.
	Like the others, Anna Pavlovna Scherer showed Pierre the change ofttitude toward him that had taken place in society.
	Formerly in Anna Pavlovna's presence, Pierre had always felt thathat he was saying was out of place, tactless and unsuitable, thatemarks which seemed to him clever while they formed in his mindecame foolish as soon as he uttered them, while on the contraryippolyte's stupidest remarks came out clever and apt. Nowverything Pierre said was charmant. Even if Anna Pavlovna did not sayo, he could see that she wished to and only refrained out of regardor his modesty.
	In the beginning of the winter of 1805-6 Pierre received one of Annaavlovna's usual pink notes with an invitation to which was added:You will find the beautiful Helene here, whom it is always delightfulo see."
	When he read that sentence, Pierre felt for the first time that someink which other people recognized had grown up between himself andelene, and that thought both alarmed him, as if some obligationere being imposed on him which he could not fulfill, and pleasedim as an entertaining supposition.
	Anna Pavlovna's "At Home" was like the former one, only theovelty she offered her guests this time was not Mortemart, but aiplomatist fresh from Berlin with the very latest details of themperor Alexander's visit to Potsdam, and of how the two augustriends had pledged themselves in an indissoluble alliance to upholdhe cause of justice against the enemy of the human race. Annaavlovna received Pierre with a shade of melancholy, evidentlyelating to the young man's recent loss by the death of Count Bezukhoveveryone constantly considered it a duty to assure Pierre that he wasreatly afflicted by the death of the father he had hardly known), ander melancholy was just like the august melancholy she showed at theention of her most august Majesty the Empress Marya Fedorovna. Pierreelt flattered by this. Anna Pavlovna arranged the different groups iner drawing room with her habitual skill. The large group, in whichere Prince Vasili and the generals, had the benefit of theiplomat. Another group was at the tea table. Pierre wished to joinhe former, but Anna Pavlovna- who was in the excited condition of aommander on a battlefield to whom thousands of new and brilliantdeas occur which there is hardly time to put in action- seeingierre, touched his sleeve with her finger, saying:
	"Wait a bit, I have something in view for you this evening." (Shelanced at Helene and smiled at her.) "My dear Helene, be charitableo my poor aunt who adores you. Go and keep her company for teninutes. And that it will not be too dull, here is the dear countho will not refuse to accompany you."
	The beauty went to the aunt, but Anna Pavlovna detained Pierre,ooking as if she had to give some final necessary instructions.
	"Isn't she exquisite?" she said to Pierre, pointing to the statelyeauty as she glided away. "And how she carries herself! For sooung a girl, such tact, such masterly perfection of manner! Itomes from her heart. Happy the man who wins her! With her the leastorldly of men would occupy a most brilliant position in society.on't you think so? I only wanted to know your opinion," and Annaavlovna let Pierre go.
	Pierre, in reply, sincerely agreed with her as to Helene'serfection of manner. If he ever thought of Helene, it was just of hereauty and her remarkable skill in appearing silently dignified inociety.
	The old aunt received the two young people in her corner, but seemedesirous of hiding her adoration for Helene and inclined rather tohow her fear of Anna Pavlovna. She looked at her niece, as ifnquiring what she was to do with these people. On leaving them,nna Pavlovna again touched Pierre's sleeve, saying: "I hope you won'tay that it is dull in my house again," and she glanced at Helene.
	Helene smiled, with a look implying that she did not admit theossibility of anyone seeing her without being enchanted. The auntoughed, swallowed, and said in French that she was very pleased toee Helene, then she turned to Pierre with the same words of welcomend the same look. In the middle of a dull and halting conversation,elene turned to Pierre with the beautiful bright smile that sheave to everyone. Pierre was so used to that smile, and it had soittle meaning for him, that he paid no attention to it. The auntas just speaking of a collection of snuffboxes that had belonged toierre's father, Count Bezukhov, and showed them her own box. Princesselene asked to see the portrait of the aunt's husband on the box lid.
	"That is probably the work of Vinesse," said Pierre, mentioning aelebrated miniaturist, and he leaned over the table to take thenuffbox while trying to hear what was being said at the other table.
	He half rose, meaning to go round, but the aunt handed him thenuffbox, passing it across Helene's back. Helene stooped forward toake room, and looked round with a smile. She was, as always atvening parties, wearing a dress such as was then fashionable, cutery low at front and back. Her bust, which had always seemed likearble to Pierre, was so close to him that his shortsighted eyes couldot but perceive the living charm of her neck and shoulders, so nearo his lips that he need only have bent his head a little to haveouched them. He was conscious of the warmth of her body, the scent oferfume, and the creaking of her corset as she moved. He did not seeer marble beauty forming a complete whole with her dress, but all theharm of her body only covered by her garments. And having once seenhis he could not help being aware it, just as we cannot renew anllusion we have once seen through.
	"So you have never noticed before how beautiful I am?" Helene seemedo say. "You had not noticed that I am a woman? Yes, I am a womanho may belong to anyone- to you too," said her glance. And at thatoment Pierre felt that Helene not only could, but must, be hisife, and that it could not be otherwise.
	He knew this at that moment as surely as if he had been standingt the altar with her. How and when this would be he did not know,e did not even know if it would be a good thing (he even felt, henew not why, that it would be a bad thing), but he knew it wouldappen.
	Pierre dropped his eyes, lifted them again, and wished once moreo see her as a distant beauty far removed from him, as he had seener every day until then, but he could no longer do it. He couldot, any more than a man who has been looking at a tuft of stepperass through the mist and taking it for a tree can again take itor a tree after he has once recognized it to be a tuft of grass.he was terribly close to him. She already had power over him, andetween them there was no longer any barrier except the barrier of hiswn will.
	"Well, I will leave you in your little corner," came Anna Pavlovna'soice, "I see you are all right there."
	And Pierre, anxiously trying to remember whether he had donenything reprehensible, looked round with a blush. It seemed to himhat everyone knew what had happened to him as he knew it himself.
	A little later when he went up to the large circle, Anna Pavlovnaaid to him: "I hear you are refitting your Petersburg house?"
	This was true. The architect had told him that it was necessary, andierre, without knowing why, was having his enormous Petersburgouse done up.
	"That's a good thing, but don't move from Prince Vasili's. It isood to have a friend like the prince," she said, smiling at Princeasili. "I know something about that. Don't I? And you are still sooung. You need advice. Don't be angry with me for exercising an oldoman's privilege."
	She paused, as women always do, expecting something after theyave mentioned their age. "If you marry it will be a different thing,"he continued, uniting them both in one glance. Pierre did not look atelene nor she at him. But she was just as terribly close to him. Heuttered something and colored.
	When he got home he could not sleep for a long time for thinkingf what had happened. What had happened? Nothing. He had merelynderstood that the woman he had known as a child, of whom when hereauty was mentioned he had said absent-mindedly: "Yes, she's goodooking," he had understood that this woman might belong to him.
	"But she's stupid. I have myself said she is stupid," he thought.There is something nasty, something wrong, in the feeling she excitesn me. I have been told that her brother Anatole was in love wither and she with him, that there was quite a scandal and that that'shy he was sent away. Hippolyte is her brother... Prince Vasili is herather... It's bad...." he reflected, but while he was thinking thisthe reflection was still incomplete), he caught himself smiling andas conscious that another line of thought had sprung up, and whilehinking of her worthlessness he was also dreaming of how she would beis wife, how she would love him become quite different, and how alle had thought and heard of her might be false. And he again saw herot as the daughter of Prince Vasili, but visualized her whole bodynly veiled by its gray dress. "But no! Why did this thought neverccur to me before?" and again he told himself that it was impossible,hat there would be something unnatural, and as it seemed to himishonorable, in this marriage. He recalled her former words and looksnd the words and looks of those who had seen them together. Heecalled Anna Pavlovna's words and looks when she spoke to him aboutis house, recalled thousands of such hints from Prince Vasili andthers, and was seized by terror lest he had already, in some way,ound himself to do something that was evidently wrong and that heught not to do. But at the very time he was expressing thisonviction to himself, in another part of his mind her image rose inll its womanly beauty.BK3|CH2
	CHAPTER II
	In November, 1805, Prince Vasili had to go on a tour of inspectionn four different provinces. He had arranged this for himself so as toisit his neglected estates at the same time and pick up his sonnatole where his regiment was stationed, and take him to visit Princeicholas Bolkonski in order to arrange a match for him with theaughter of that rich old man. But before leaving home and undertakinghese new affairs, Prince Vasili had to settle matters with Pierre,ho, it is true, had latterly spent whole days at home, that is, inrince Vasili's house where he was staying, and had been absurd,xcited, and foolish in Helene's presence (as a lover should be),ut had not yet proposed to her.
	"This is all very fine, but things must be settled," said Princeasili to himself, with a sorrowful sigh, one morning, feeling thatierre who was under such obligations to him ("But never mind that")as not behaving very well in this matter. "Youth, frivolity...ell, God be with him," thought he, relishing his own goodness ofeart, "but it must be brought to a head. The day after tomorrowill be Lelya's name day. I will invite two or three people, and if heoes not understand what he ought to do then it will be my affair-es, my affair. I am her father."
	Six weeks after Anna Pavlovna's "At Home" and after the sleeplessight when he had decided that to marry Helene would be a calamity andhat he ought to avoid her and go away, Pierre, despite that decision,ad not left Prince Vasili's and felt with terror that in people'syes he was every day more and more connected with her, that it wasmpossible for him to return to his former conception of her, thate could not break away from her, and that though it would be aerrible thing he would have to unite his fate with hers. He mighterhaps have been able to free himself but that Prince Vasili (who hadarely before given receptions) now hardly let a day go by withoutaving an evening party at which Pierre had to be present unless heished to spoil the general pleasure and disappoint everyone'sxpectation. Prince Vasili, in the rare moments when he was at home,ould take Pierre's hand in passing and draw it downwards, orbsent-mindedly hold out his wrinkled, clean-shaven cheek for Pierreo kiss and would say: "Till tomorrow," or, "Be in to dinner or Ihall not see you," or, "I am staying in for your sake," and so on.nd though Prince Vasili, when he stayed in (as he said) forierre's sake, hardly exchanged a couple of words with him, Pierreelt unable to disappoint him. Every day he said to himself one andhe same thing: "It is time I understood her and made up my mindhat she really is. Was I mistaken before, or am I mistaken now? No,he is not stupid, she is an excellent girl," he sometimes said toimself "she never makes a mistake, never says anything stupid. Sheays little, but what she does say is always clear and simple, sohe is not stupid. She never was abashed and is not abashed now, sohe cannot be a bad woman!" He had often begun to make reflectionsr think aloud in her company, and she had always answered himither by a brief but appropriate remark- showing that it did notnterest her- or by a silent look and smile which more palpably thannything else showed Pierre her superiority. She was right inegarding all arguments as nonsense in comparison with that smile.
	She always addressed him with a radiantly confiding smile meantor him alone, in which there was something more significant than inhe general smile that usually brightened her face. Pierre knew thatveryone was waiting for him to say a word and cross a certain line,nd he knew that sooner or later he would step across it, but anncomprehensible terror seized him at the thought of that dreadfultep. A thousand times during that month and a half while he feltimself drawn nearer and nearer to that dreadful abyss, Pierre said toimself: "What am I doing? I need resolution. Can it be that I haveone?"
	He wished to take a decision, but felt with dismay that in thisatter he lacked that strength of will which he had known in himselfnd really possessed. Pierre was one of those who are only strong whenhey feel themselves quite innocent, and since that day when he wasverpowered by a feeling of desire while stooping over the snuffbox atnna Pavlovna's, an unacknowledged sense of the guilt of that desirearalyzed his will.
	On Helene's name day, a small party of just their own people- as hisife said- met for supper at Prince Vasili's. All these friends andelations had been given to understand that the fate of the young girlould be decided that evening. The visitors were seated at supper.rincess Kuragina, a portly imposing woman who had once been handsome,as sitting at the head of the table. On either side of her sat theore important guests- an old general and his wife, and Annaavlovna Scherer. At the other end sat the younger and lessmportant guests, and there too sat the members of the family, andierre and Helene, side by side. Prince Vasili was not having anyupper: he went round the table in a merry mood, sitting down now byne, now by another, of the guests. To each of them he made someareless and agreeable remark except to Pierre and Helene, whoseresence he seemed not to notice. He enlivened the whole party. Theax candles burned brightly, the silver and crystal gleamed, so didhe ladies' toilets and the gold and silver of the men's epaulets;ervants in scarlet liveries moved round the table, the clatter oflates, knives, and glasses mingled with the animated hum of severalonversations. At one end of the table, the old chamberlain waseard assuring an old baroness that he loved her passionately, athich she laughed; at the other could be heard the story of theisfortunes of some Mary Viktorovna or other. At the center of theable, Prince Vasili attracted everybody's attention. With a facetiousmile on his face, he was telling the ladies about last Wednesday'seeting of the Imperial Council, at which Sergey Kuzmichyazmitinov, the new military governor general of Petersburg, hadeceived and read the then famous rescript of the Emperor Alexanderrom the army to Sergey Kuzmich, in which the Emperor said that he waseceiving from all sides declarations of the people's loyalty, thathe declaration from Petersburg gave him particular pleasure, and thate was proud to be at the head of such a nation and would endeavoro be worthy of it. This rescript began with the words: "Sergeyuzmich, From all sides reports reach me," etc.
	"Well, and so he never got farther than: 'Sergey Kuzmich'?" askedne of the ladies.
	"Exactly, not a hair's breadth farther," answered Prince Vasili,aughing, "'Sergey Kuzmich... From all sides... From all sides...ergey Kuzmich...' Poor Vyazmitinov could not get any farther! Heegan the rescript again and again, but as soon as he uttered 'Sergey'e sobbed, 'Kuz-mi-ch,' tears, and 'From all sides' was smothered inobs and he could get no farther. And again his handkerchief, andgain: 'Sergey Kuzmich, From all sides,'... and tears, till at lastomebody else was asked to read it."
	"Kuzmich... From all sides... and then tears," someone repeatedaughing.
	"Don't be unkind," cried Anna Pavlovna from her end of the tableolding up a threatening finger. "He is such a worthy and excellentan, our dear Vyazmitinov...."
	Everybody laughed a great deal. At the head of the table, wherehe honored guests sat, everyone seemed to be in high spirits andnder the influence of a variety of exciting sensations. Only Pierrend Helene sat silently side by side almost at the bottom of theable, a suppressed smile brightening both their faces, a smile thatad nothing to do with Sergey Kuzmich- a smile of bashfulness at theirwn feelings. But much as all the rest laughed, talked, and joked,uch as they enjoyed their Rhine wine, saute, and ices, and howeverhey avoided looking at the young couple, and heedless and unobservants they seemed of them, one could feel by the occasional glanceshey gave that the story about Sergey Kuzmich, the laughter, and theood were all a pretense, and that the whole attention of that companyas directed to- Pierre and Helene. Prince Vasili mimicked the sobbingf Sergey Kuzmich and at the same time his eyes glanced toward hisaughter, and while he laughed the expression on his face clearlyaid: "Yes... it's getting on, it will all be settled today." Annaavlovna threatened him on behalf of "our dear Vyazmitinov," and iner eyes, which, for an instant, glanced at Pierre, Prince Vasili read congratulation on his future son-in-law and on his daughter'sappiness. The old princess sighed sadly as she offered some wine tohe old lady next to her and glanced angrily at her daughter, ander sigh seemed to say: "Yes, there's nothing left for you and meut to sip sweet wine, my dear, now that the time has come for theseoung ones to be thus boldly, provocatively happy." "And what nonsensell this is that I am saying!" thought a diplomatist, glancing athe happy faces of the lovers. "That's happiness!"
	Into the insignificant, trifling, and artificial interests unitinghat society had entered the simple feeling of the attraction of aealthy and handsome young man and woman for one another. And thisuman feeling dominated everything else and soared above all theirffected chatter. Jests fell flat, news was not interesting, and thenimation was evidently forced. Not only the guests but even theootmen waiting at table seemed to feel this, and they forgot theiruties as they looked at the beautiful Helene with her radiant facend at the red, broad, and happy though uneasy face of Pierre. Iteemed as if the very light of the candles was focused on those twoappy faces alone.
	Pierre felt that he the center of it all, and this both pleasednd embarrassed him. He was like a man entirely absorbed in someccupation. He did not see, hear, or understand anything clearly. Onlyow and then detached ideas and impressions from the world ofeality shot unexpectedly through his mind.
	"So it is all finished!" he thought. "And how has it all happened?ow quickly! Now I know that not because of her alone, nor of myselflone, but because of everyone, it must inevitably come about. Theyre all expecting it, they are so sure that it will happen that Iannot, I cannot, disappoint them. But how will it be? I do notnow, but it will certainly happen!" thought Pierre, glancing at thoseazzling shoulders close to his eyes.
	Or he would suddenly feel ashamed of he knew not what. He felt itwkward to attract everyone's attention and to be considered a luckyan and, with his plain face, to be looked on as a sort of Parisossessed of a Helen. "But no doubt it always is and must be so!" heonsoled himself. "And besides, what have I done to bring it about?ow did it begin? I traveled from Moscow with Prince Vasili. Thenhere was nothing. So why should I not stay at his house? Then Ilayed cards with her and picked up her reticule and drove out wither. How did it begin, when did it all come about?" And here he wasitting by her side as her betrothed, seeing, hearing, feeling herearness, her breathing, her movements, her beauty. Then it woulduddenly seem to him that it was not she but he was so unusuallyeautiful, and that that was why they all looked so at him, andlattered by this general admiration he would expand his chest,aise his head, and rejoice at his good fortune. Suddenly he heard aamiliar voice repeating something to him a second time. But Pierreas so absorbed that he did not understand what was said.
	"I am asking you when you last heard from Bolkonski," repeatedrince Vasili a third time. "How absent-minded you are, my dearellow."
	Prince Vasili smiled, and Pierre noticed that everyone was smilingt him and Helene. "Well, what of it, if you all know it?" thoughtierre. "What of it? It's the truth!" and he himself smiled his gentlehildlike smile, and Helene smiled too.
	"When did you get the letter? Was it from Olmutz?" repeated Princeasili, who pretended to want to know this in order to settle aispute.
	"How can one talk or think of such trifles?" thought Pierre.
	"Yes, from Olmutz," he answered, with a sigh.
	After supper Pierre with his partner followed the others into therawing room. The guests began to disperse, some without takingeave of Helene. Some, as if unwilling to distract her from anmportant occupation, came up to her for a moment and made haste to goway, refusing to let her see them off. The diplomatist preserved aournful silence as he left the drawing room. He pictured the vanityf his diplomatic career in comparison with Pierre's happiness. Theld general grumbled at his wife when she asked how his leg was.Oh, the old fool," he thought. "That Princess Helene will beeautiful still when she's fifty."
	"I think I may congratulate you," whispered Anna Pavlovna to the oldrincess, kissing her soundly. "If I hadn't this headache I'd havetayed longer."
	The old princess did not reply, she was tormented by jealousy of heraughter's happiness.
	While the guests were taking their leave Pierre remained for aong time alone with Helene in the little drawing room where they wereitting. He had often before, during the last six weeks, remainedlone with her, but had never spoken to her of love. Now he felthat it was inevitable, but he could not make up his mind to takehe final step. He felt ashamed; he felt that he was occupying someonelse's place here beside Helene. "This happiness is not for you," somenner voice whispered to him. "This happiness is for those who haveot in them what there is in you."
	But, as he had to say something, he began by asking her whetherhe was satisfied with the party. She replied in her usual simpleanner that this name day of hers had been one of the pleasantesthe had ever had.
	Some of the nearest relatives had not yet left. They were sitting inhe large drawing room. Prince Vasili came up to Pierre with languidootsteps. Pierre rose and said it was getting late. Prince Vasiliave him a look of stern inquiry, as though what Pierre had justaid was so strange that one could not take it in. But then thexpression of severity changed, and he drew Pierre's hand downwards,ade him sit down, and smiled affectionately.
	"Well, Lelya?" he asked, turning instantly to his daughter andddressing her with the careless tone of habitual tenderness naturalo parents who have petted their children from babyhood, but whichrince Vasili had only acquired by imitating other parents.
	And he again turned to Pierre.
	"Sergey Kuzmich- From all sides-" he said, unbuttoning the toputton of his waistcoat.
	Pierre smiled, but his smile showed that he knew it was not thetory about Sergey Kuzmich that interested Prince Vasili just then,nd Prince Vasili saw that Pierre knew this. He suddenly mutteredomething and went away. It seemed to Pierre that even the princeas disconcerted. The sight of the discomposure of that old man of theorld touched Pierre: he looked at Helene and she too seemedisconcerted, and her look seemed to say: "Well, it is your ownault."
	"The step must be taken but I cannot, I cannot!" thought Pierre, ande again began speaking about indifferent matters, about Sergeyuzmich, asking what the point of the story was as he had not heard itroperly. Helene answered with a smile that she too had missed it.
	When Prince Vasili returned to the drawing room, the princess, hisife, was talking in low tones to the elderly lady about Pierre.
	"Of course, it is a very brilliant match, but happiness, my dear..."
	"Marriages are made in heaven," replied the elderly lady.
	Prince Vasili passed by, seeming not to hear the ladies, and satown on a sofa in a far corner of the room. He closed his eyes andeemed to be dozing. His head sank forward and then he roused himself.
	"Aline," he said to his wife, "go and see what they are about."
	The princess went up to the door, passed by it with a dignifiednd indifferent air, and glanced into the little drawing room.ierre and Helene still sat talking just as before.
	"Still the same," she said to her husband.
	Prince Vasili frowned, twisting his mouth, his cheeks quivered andis face assumed the coarse, unpleasant expression peculiar to him.haking himself, he rose, threw back his head, and with resolute stepsent past the ladies into the little drawing room. With quick steps heent joyfully up to Pierre. His face was so unusually triumphanthat Pierre rose in alarm on seeing it.
	"Thank God!" said Prince Vasili. "My wife has told me everything!-He put one arm around Pierre and the other around his daughter.)- "Myear boy... Lelya... I am very pleased." (His voice trembled.) "Ioved your father... and she will make you a good wife... God blessou!..."
	He embraced his daughter, and then again Pierre, and kissed him withis malodorous mouth. Tears actually moistened his cheeks.
	"Princess, come here!" he shouted.
	The old princess came in and also wept. The elderly lady was usinger handkerchief too. Pierre was kissed, and he kissed the beautifulelene's hand several times. After a while they were left alone again.
	"All this had to be and could not be otherwise," thought Pierre, "sot is useless to ask whether it is good or bad. It is good becauset's definite and one is rid of the old tormenting doubt." Pierre heldhe hand of his betrothed in silence, looking at her beautiful bosoms it rose and fell.
	"Helene!" he said aloud and paused.
	"Something special is always said in such cases," he thought, butould not remember what it was that people say. He looked at her face.he drew nearer to him. Her face flushed.
	"Oh, take those off... those..." she said, pointing to hispectacles.
	Pierre took them off, and his eyes, besides the strange look eyesave from which spectacles have just been removed, had also arightened and inquiring look. He was about to stoop over her hand andiss it, but with a rapid, almost brutal movement of her head, shentercepted his lips and met them with her own. Her face struckierre, by its altered, unpleasantly excited expression.
	"It is too late now, it's done; besides I love her," thought Pierre.
	"Je vous aime!"* he said, remembering what has to be said at suchoments: but his words sounded so weak that he felt ashamed ofimself.
	*"I love you."
	Six weeks later he was married, and settled in Count Bezukhov'sarge, newly furnished Petersburg house, the happy possessor, aseople said, of a wife who was a celebrated beauty and of millionsf money.BK3|CH3
	CHAPTER III
	Old Prince Nicholas Bolkonski received a letter from Prince Vasilin November, 1805, announcing that he and his son would be payingim a visit. "I am starting on a journey of inspection, and ofourse I shall think nothing of an extra seventy miles to come and seeou at the same time, my honored benefactor," wrote Prince Vasili. "Myon Anatole is accompanying me on his way to the army, so I hope youill allow him personally to express the deep respect that,mulating his father, he feels for you."
	"It seems that there will be no need to bring Mary out, suitorsre coming to us of their own accord," incautiously remarked theittle princess on hearing the news.
	Prince Nicholas frowned, but said nothing.
	A fortnight after the letter Prince Vasili's servants came onevening in advance of him, and he and his son arrived next day.
	Old Bolkonski had always had a poor opinion of Prince Vasili'sharacter, but more so recently, since in the new reigns of Paul andlexander Prince Vasili had risen to high position and honors. Andow, from the hints contained in his letter and given by the littlerincess, he saw which way the wind was blowing, and his low opinionhanged into a feeling of contemptuous ill will. He snorted whenevere mentioned him. On the day of Prince Vasili's arrival, Princeolkonski was particularly discontented and out of temper. Whethere was in a bad temper because Prince Vasili was coming, or whetheris being in a bad temper made him specially annoyed at Princeasili's visit, he was in a bad temper, and in the morning Tikhonad already advised the architect not to go the prince with hiseport.
	"Do you hear how he's walking?" said Tikhon, drawing the architect'sttention to the sound of the prince's footsteps. "Stepping flat onis heels- we know what that means...."
	However, at nine o'clock the prince, in his velvet coat with a sableollar and cap, went out for his usual walk. It had snowed the dayefore and the path to the hothouse, along which the prince was in theabit of walking, had been swept: the marks of the broom were stillisible in the snow and a shovel had been left sticking in one ofhe soft snowbanks that bordered both sides of the path. The princeent through the conservatories, the serfs' quarters, and theutbuildings, frowning and silent.
	"Can a sleigh pass?" he asked his overseer, a venerable man,esembling his master in manners and looks, who was accompanying himack to the house.
	"The snow is deep. I am having the avenue swept, your honor."
	The prince bowed his head and went up to the porch. "God behanked," thought the overseer, "the storm has blown over!"
	"It would have been hard to drive up, your honor," he added. "Ieard, your honor, that a minister is coming to visit your honor."
	The prince turned round to the overseer and fixed his eyes on him,rowning.
	"What? A minister? What minister? Who gave orders?" he said in hishrill, harsh voice. "The road is not swept for the princess myaughter, but for a minister! For me, there are no ministers!"
	"Your honor, I thought..."
	"You thought!" shouted the prince, his words coming more and moreapidly and indistinctly. "You thought!... Rascals! Blackgaurds!...'ll teach you to think!" and lifting his stick he swung it andould have hit Alpatych, the overseer, had not the latternstinctively avoided the blow. "Thought... Blackguards..." shoutedhe prince rapidly.
	But although Alpatych, frightened at his own temerity in avoidinghe stroke, came up to the prince, bowing his bald head resignedlyefore him, or perhaps for that very reason, the prince, though heontinued to shout: "Blackgaurds!... Throw the snow back on the road!"id not lift his stick again but hurried into the house.
	Before dinner, Princess Mary and Mademoiselle Bourienne, who knewhat the prince was in a bad humor, stood awaiting him; Mademoiselleourienne with a radiant face that said: "I know nothing, I am theame as usual," and Princess Mary pale, frightened, and withowncast eyes. What she found hardest to bear was to know that on suchccasions she ought to behave like Mademoiselle Bourienne, but couldot. She thought: "If I seem not to notice he will think that I do notympathize with him; if I seem sad and out of spirits myself, heill say (as he has done before) that I'm in the dumps."
	The prince looked at his daughter's frightened face and snorted.
	"Fool... or dummy!" he muttered.
	"And the other one is not here. They've been telling tales," hehought- referring to the little princess who was not in the diningoom.
	"Where is the princess?" he asked. "Hiding?"
	"She is not very well," answered Mademoiselle Bourienne with aright smile, "so she won't come down. It is natural in her state."
	"Hm! Hm!" muttered the prince, sitting down.
	His plate seemed to him not quite clean, and pointing to a spot helung it away. Tikhon caught it and handed it to a footman. The littlerincess was not unwell, but had such an overpowering fear of therince that, hearing he was in a bad humor, she had decided not toppear.
	"I am afraid for the baby," she said to Mademoiselle Bourienne:Heaven knows what a fright might do."
	In general at Bald Hills the little princess lived in constant fear,nd with a sense of antipathy to the old prince which she did notealize because the fear was so much the stronger feeling. Therince reciprocated this antipathy, but it was overpowered by hisontempt for her. When the little princess had grown accustomed toife at Bald Hills, she took a special fancy to Mademoiselleourienne, spent whole days with her, asked her to sleep in heroom, and often talked with her about the old prince and criticizedim.
	"So we are to have visitors, mon prince?" remarked Mademoiselleourienne, unfolding her white napkin with her rosy fingers. "Hisxcellency Prince Vasili Kuragin and his son, I understand?" sheaid inquiringly.
	"Hm!- his excellency is a puppy.... I got him his appointment in theervice," said the prince disdainfully. "Why his son is coming I don'tnderstand. Perhaps Princess Elizabeth and Princess Mary know. I don'tant him." (He looked at his blushing daughter.) "Are you unwelloday? Eh? Afraid of the 'minister' as that idiot Alpatych calledim this morning?"
	"No, mon pere."
	Though Mademoiselle Bourienne had been so unsuccessful in her choicef a subject, she did not stop talking, but chattered about theonservatories and the beauty of a flower that had just opened, andfter the soup the prince became more genial.
	After dinner, he went to see his daughter-in-law. The littlerincess was sitting at a small table, chattering with Masha, heraid. She grew pale on seeing her father-in-law.
	She was much altered. She was now plain rather than pretty. Herheeks had sunk, her lip was drawn up, and her eyes drawn down.
	"Yes, I feel a kind of oppression," she said in reply to therince's question as to how she felt.
	"Do you want anything?"
	"No, merci, mon pere."
	"Well, all right, all right."
	He left the room and went to the waiting room where Alpatych stoodith bowed head.
	"Has the snow been shoveled back?"
	"Yes, your excellency. Forgive me for heaven's sake... It was onlyy stupidity."
	"All right, all right," interrupted the prince, and laughing hisnnatural way, he stretched out his hand for Alpatych to kiss, andhen proceeded to his study.
	Prince Vasili arrived that evening. He was met in the avenue byoachmen and footmen, who, with loud shouts, dragged his sleighs up tone of the lodges over the road purposely laden with snow.
	Prince Vasili and Anatole had separate rooms assigned to them.
	Anatole, having taken off his overcoat, sat with arms akimboefore a table on a corner of which he smilingly and absent-mindedlyixed his large and handsome eyes. He regarded his whole life as aontinual round of amusement which someone for some reason had torovide for him. And he looked on this visit to a churlish old man and rich and ugly heiress in the same way. All this might, he thought,urn out very well and amusingly. "And why not marry her if she reallyas so much money? That never does any harm," thought Anatole.
	He shaved and scented himself with the care and elegance which hadecome habitual to him and, his handsome head held high, entered hisather's room with the good-humored and victorious air natural to him.rince Vasili's two valets were busy dressing him, and he looked roundith much animation and cheerfully nodded to his son as the latterntered, as if to say: "Yes, that's how I want you to look."
	"I say, Father, joking apart, is she very hideous?" Anatole asked,s if continuing a conversation the subject of which had often beenentioned during the journey.
	"Enough! What nonsense! Above all, try to be respectful and cautiousith the old prince."
	"If he starts a row I'll go away," said Prince Anatole. "I can'tear those old men! Eh?"
	"Remember, for you everything depends on this."
	In the meantime, not only was it known in the maidservants' roomshat the minister and his son had arrived, but the appearance ofoth had been minutely described. Princess Mary was sitting alone iner room, vainly trying to master her agitation.
	"Why did they write, why did Lise tell me about it? It can neverappen!" she said, looking at herself in the glass. "How shall I enterhe drawing room? Even if I like him I can't now be myself withim." The mere thought of her father's look filled her with terror.he little princess and Mademoiselle Bourienne had already receivedrom Masha, the lady's maid, the necessary report of how handsomehe minister's son was, with his rosy cheeks and dark eyebrows, andith what difficulty the father had dragged his legs upstairs whilehe son had followed him like an eagle, three steps at a time.aving received this information, the little princess and Mademoiselleourienne, whose chattering voices had reached her from theorridor, went into Princess Mary's room.
	"You know they've come, Marie?" said the little princess, waddlingn, and sinking heavily into an armchair.
	She was no longer in the loose gown she generally wore in theorning, but had on one of her best dresses. Her hair was carefullyone and her face was animated, which, however, did not conceal itsunken and faded outlines. Dressed as she used to be in Petersburgociety, it was still more noticeable how much plainer she had become.ome unobtrusive touch had been added to Mademoiselle Bourienne'soilet which rendered her fresh and prettyface yet more attractive.
	"What! Are you going to remain as you are, dear princess?" sheegan. "They'll be announcing that the gentlemen are in the drawingoom and we shall have to go down, and you have not smartened yourselfp at all!"
	The little princess got up, rang for the maid, and hurriedly anderrily began to devise and carry out a plan of how Princess Maryhould be dressed. Princess Mary's self-esteem was wounded by the facthat the arrival of a suitor agitated her, and still more so by bother companions' not having the least conception that it could betherwise. To tell them that she felt ashamed for herself and for themould be to betray her agitation, while to decline their offers toress her would prolong their banter and insistence. She flushed,er beautiful eyes grew dim, red blotches came on her face, and itook on the unattractive martyrlike expression it so often wore, ashe submitted herself to Mademoiselle Bourienne and Lise. Both theseomen quite sincerely tried to make her look pretty. She was solain that neither of them could think of her as a rival, so theyegan dressing her with perfect sincerity, and with the naive and firmonviction women have that dress can make a face pretty.
	"No really, my dear, this dress is not pretty," said Lise, lookingideways at Princess Mary from a little distance. "You have a maroonress, have it fetched. Really! You know the fate of your whole lifeay be at stake. But this one is too light, it's not becoming!"
	It was not the dress, but the face and whole figure of Princess Maryhat was not pretty, but neither Mademoiselle Bourienne nor the littlerincess felt this; they still thought that if a blue ribbon werelaced in the hair, the hair combed up, and the blue scarf arrangedower on the best maroon dress, and so on, all would be well. Theyorgot that the frightened face and the figure could not be altered,nd that however they might change the setting and adornment of thatace, it would still remain piteous and plain. After two or threehanges to which Princess Mary meekly submitted, just as her hairad been arranged on the top of her head (a style that quite alterednd spoiled her looks) and she had put on a maroon dress with aale-blue scarf, the little princess walked twice round her, nowdjusting a fold of the dress with her little hand, now arranginghe scarf and looking at her with her head bent first on one sidend then on the other.
	"No, it will not do," she said decidedly, clasping her hands. "No,ary, really this dress does not suit you. I prefer you in your littleray everyday dress. Now please, do it for my sake. Katie," she saido the maid, "bring the princess her gray dress, and you'll see,ademoiselle Bourienne, how I shall arrange it," she added, smilingith a foretaste of artistic pleasure.
	But when Katie brought the required dress, Princess Mary remaineditting motionless before the glass, looking at her face, and saw inhe mirror her eyes full of tears and her mouth quivering, ready tourst into sobs.
	"Come, dear princess," said Mademoiselle Bourienne, "just one moreittle effort."
	The little princess, taking the dress from the maid, came up torincess Mary.
	"Well, now we'll arrange something quite simple and becoming," sheaid.
	The three voices, hers, Mademoiselle Bourienne's, and Katie's, whoas laughing at something, mingled in a merry sound, like the chirpingf birds.
	"No, leave me alone," said Princess Mary.
	Her voice sounded so serious and so sad that the chirping of theirds was silenced at once. They looked at the beautiful, large,houghtful eyes full of tears and of thoughts, gazing shiningly andmploringly at them, and understood that it was useless and even cruelo insist.
	"At least, change your coiffure," said the little princess.Didn't I tell you," she went on, turning reproachfully toademoiselle Bourienne, "Mary's is a face which such a coiffure doesot suit in the least. Not in the least! Please change it."
	"Leave me alone, please leave me alone! It is all quite the sameo me," answered a voice struggling with tears.
	Mademoiselle Bourienne and the little princess had to own tohemselves that Princess Mary in this guise looked very plain, worsehan usual, but it was too late. She was looking at them with anxpression they both knew, an expression thoughtful and sad. Thisxpression in Princess Mary did not frighten them (she nevernspired fear in anyone), but they knew that when it appeared on herace, she became mute and was not to be shaken in her determination.
	"You will change it, won't you?" said Lise. And as Princess Maryave no answer, she left the room.
	Princess Mary was left alone. She did not comply with Lise'sequest, she not only left her hair as it was, but did not even lookn her glass. Letting her arms fall helplessly, she sat withowncast eyes and pondered. A husband, a man, a strong dominant andtrangely attractive being rose in her imagination, and carried hernto a totally different happy world of his own. She fancied ahild, her own- such as she had seen the day before in the arms of herurse's daughter- at her own breast, the husband standing by andazing tenderly at her and the child. "But no, it is impossible, Im too ugly," she thought.
	"Please come to tea. The prince will be out in a moment," came theaid's voice at the door.
	She roused herself, and felt appalled at what she had been thinking,nd before going down she went into the room where the icons hung and,er eyes fixed on the dark face of a large icon of the Saviour lity a lamp, she stood before it with folded hands for a few moments. painful doubt filled her soul. Could the joy of love, of earthlyove for a man, be for her? In her thoughts of marriage Princessary dreamed of happiness and of children, but her strongest, mosteeply hidden longing was for earthly love. The more she tried to hidehis feeling from others and even from herself, the stronger itrew. "O God," she said, "how am I to stifle in my heart theseemptations of the devil? How am I to renounce forever these vileancies, so as peacefully to fulfill Thy will?" And scarcely had sheut that question than God gave her the answer in her own heart.Desire nothing for thyself, seek nothing, be not anxious ornvious. Man's future and thy own fate must remain hidden from thee,ut live so that thou mayest be ready for anything. If it be God'sill to prove thee in the duties of marriage, be ready to fulfillis will." With this consoling thought (but yet with a hope for theulfillment of her forbidden earthly longing) Princess Mary sighed,nd having crossed herself went down, thinking neither of her gown andoiffure nor of how she would go in nor of what she would say. Whatould all that matter in comparison with the will of God, withouthose care not a hair of man's head can fall?BK3|CH4
	CHAPTER IV
	When Princess Mary came down, Prince Vasili and his son were alreadyn the drawing room, talking to the little princess and Mademoiselleourienne. When she entered with her heavy step, treading on hereels, the gentlemen and Mademoiselle Bourienne rose and the littlerincess, indicating her to the gentlemen, said: "Voila Marie!"rincess Mary saw them all and saw them in detail. She saw Princeasili's face, serious for an instant at the sight of her, butmmediately smiling again, and the little princess curiously notinghe impression "Marie" produced on the visitors. And she sawademoiselle Bourienne, with her ribbon and pretty face, and hernusually animated look which was fixed on him, but him she couldot see, she only saw something large, brilliant, and handsomeoving toward her as she entered the room. Prince Vasili approachedirst, and she kissed the bold forehead that bent over her hand andnswered his question by saying that, on the contrary, sheemembered him quite well. Then Anatole came up to her. She stillould not see him. She only felt a soft hand taking hers firmly, andhe touched with her lips a white forehead, over which was beautifulight-brown hair smelling of pomade. When she looked up at him she wastruck by his beauty. Anatole stood with his right thumb under autton of his uniform, his chest expanded and his back drawn in,lightly swinging one foot, and, with his head a little bent, lookedith beaming face at the princess without speaking and evidently nothinking about her at all. Anatole was not quick-witted, nor readyr eloquent in conversation, but he had the faculty, so invaluablen society, of composure and imperturbable self-possession. If a manacking in self-confidence remains dumb on a first introduction andetrays a consciousness of the impropriety of such silence and annxiety to find something to say, the effect is bad. But Anatole wasumb, swung his foot, and smilingly examined the princess' hair. Itas evident that he could be silent in this way for a very longime. "If anyone finds this silence inconvenient, let him talk, but don't want to"' he seemed to say. Besides this, in his behavior toomen Anatole had a manner which particularly inspires in themuriosity, awe, and even love- a supercilious consciousness of his ownuperiority. It was was as if he said to them: "I know you, I knowou, but why should I bother about you? You'd be only too glad, ofourse." Perhaps he did not really think this when he met women-ven probably he did not, for in general he thought very little- butis looks and manner gave that impression. The princess felt this, ands if wishing to show him that she did not even dare expect tonterest him, she turned to his father. The conversation was generalnd animated, thanks to Princess Lise's voice and little downy liphat lifted over her white teeth. She met Prince Vasili with thatlayful manner often employed by lively chatty people, andonsisting in the assumption that between the person they so addressnd themselves there are some semi-private, long-established jokes andmusing reminiscences, though no such reminiscences really exist- justs none existed in this case. Prince Vasili readily adopted her tonend the little princess also drew Anatole, whom she hardly knew,nto these amusing recollections of things that had never occurred.ademoiselle Bourienne also shared them and even Princess Mary felterself pleasantly made to share in these merry reminiscences.
	"Here at least we shall have the benefit of your company all tourselves, dear prince," said the little princess (of course, inrench) to Prince Vasili. "It's not as at Annette's* receptionshere you always ran away; you remember cette chere Annette!"
	*Anna Pavlovna.
	"Ah, but you won't talk politics to me like Annette!"
	"And our little tea table?"
	"Oh, yes!"
	"Why is it you were never at Annette's?" the little princess askednatole. "Ah, I know, I know," she said with a sly glance, "yourrother Hippolyte told me about your goings on. Oh!" and she shook heringer at him, "I have even heard of your doings in Paris!"
	"And didn't Hippolyte tell you?" asked Prince Vasili, turning to hison and seizing the little princess' arm as if she would have run awaynd he had just managed to catch her, "didn't he tell you how heimself was pining for the dear princess, and how she showed him theoor? Oh, she is a pearl among women, Princess," he added, turningo Princess Mary.
	When Paris was mentioned, Mademoiselle Bourienne for her part seizedhe opportunity of joining in the general current of recollections.
	She took the liberty of inquiring whether it was long sincenatole had left Paris and how he had liked that city. Anatolenswered the Frenchwoman very readily and, looking at her with amile, talked to her about her native land. When he saw the prettyittle Bourienne, Anatole came to the conclusion that he would notind Bald Hills dull either. "Not at all bad!" he thought, examininger, "not at all bad, that little companion! I hope she will bring herlong with her when we're married, la petite est gentille."*
	*The little one is charming.
	The old prince dressed leisurely in his study, frowning andonsidering what he was to do. The coming of these visitors annoyedim. "What are Prince Vasili and that son of his to me? Princeasili is a shallow braggart and his son, no doubt, is a finepecimen," he grumbled to himself. What angered him was that theoming of these visitors revived in his mind an unsettled questione always tried to stifle, one about which he always deceived himself.he question was whether he could ever bring himself to part fromis daughter and give her to a husband. The prince never directlysked himself that question, knowing beforehand that he would haveo answer it justly, and justice clashed not only with his feelingsut with the very possibility of life. Life without Princess Mary,ittle as he seemed to value her, was unthinkable to him. "And whyhould she marry?" he thought. "To be unhappy for certain. There'sise, married to Andrew- a better husband one would think could hardlye found nowadays- but is she contented with her lot? And who wouldarry Marie for love? Plain and awkward! They'll take her for heronnections and wealth. Are there no women living unmarried, andven the happier for it?" So thought Prince Bolkonski whileressing, and yet the question he was always putting off demanded anmmediate answer. Prince Vasili had brought his son with the evidentntention of proposing, and today or tomorrow he would probably askor an answer. His birth and position in society were not bad.Well, I've nothing against it," the prince said to himself, "but heust be worthy of her. And that is what we shall see."
	"That is what we shall see! That is what we shall see!" he addedloud.
	He entered the drawing room with his usual alert step, glancingapidly round the company. He noticed the change in the littlerincess' dress, Mademoiselle Bourienne's ribbon, Princess Mary'snbecoming coiffure, Mademoiselle Bourienne's and Anatole's smiles,nd the loneliness of his daughter amid the general conversation. "Goterself up like a fool!" he thought, looking irritably at her. "She ishameless, and he ignores her!"
	He went straight up to Prince Vasili.
	"Well! How d'ye do? How d'ye do? Glad to see you!"
	"Friendship laughs at distance," began Prince Vasili in his usualapid, self-confident, familiar tone. "Here is my second son; pleaseove and befriend him."
	Prince Bolkonski surveyed Anatole.
	"Fine young fellow! Fine young fellow!" he said. "Well, come andiss me," and he offered his cheek.
	Anatole kissed the old man, and looked at him with curiosity anderfect composure, waiting for a display of the eccentricities hisather had told him to expect.
	Prince Bolkonski sat down in his usual place in the corner of theofa and, drawing up an armchair for Prince Vasili, pointed to itnd began questioning him about political affairs and news. Heeemed to listen attentively to what Prince Vasili said, but keptlancing at Princess Mary.
	"And so they are writing from Potsdam already?" he said, repeatingrince Vasili's last words. Then rising, he suddenly went up to hisaughter.
	"Is it for visitors you've got yourself up like that, eh?" saide. "Fine, very fine! You have done up your hair in this new way forhe visitors, and before the visitors I tell you that in future youre never to dare to change your way of dress without my consent."
	"It was my fault, mon pere," interceded the little princess, with blush.
	"You must do as you please," said Prince Bolkonski, bowing to hisaughter-in-law, "but she need not make a fool of herself, she's plainnough as it is."
	And he sat down again, paying no more attention to his daughter, whoas reduced to tears.
	"On the contrary, that coiffure suits the princess very well,"aid Prince Vasili.
	"Now you, young prince, what's your name?" said Prince Bolkonski,urning to Anatole, "come here, let us talk and get acquainted."
	"Now the fun begins," thought Anatole, sitting down with a smileeside the old prince.
	"Well, my dear boy, I hear you've been educated abroad, not taughto read and write by the deacon, like your father and me. Now tell me,y dear boy, are you serving in the Horse Guards?" asked the oldan, scrutinizing Anatole closely and intently.
	"No, I have been transferred to the line," said Anatole, hardly ableo restrain his laughter.
	"Ah! That's a good thing. So, my dear boy, you wish to serve thesar and the country? It is wartime. Such a fine fellow must serve.ell, are you off to the front?"
	"No, Prince, our regiment has gone to the front, but I amttached... what is it I am attached to, Papa?" said Anatole,urning to his father with a laugh.
	"A splendid soldier, splendid! 'What am I attached to!' Ha, ha, ha!"aughed Prince Bolkonski, and Anatole laughed still louder. Suddenlyrince Bolkonski frowned.
	"You may go," he said to Anatole.
	Anatole returned smiling to the ladies.
	"And so you've had him educated abroad, Prince Vasili, haven't you?"aid the old prince to Prince Vasili.
	"I have done my best for him, and I can assure you the educationhere is much better than ours."
	"Yes, everything is different nowadays, everything is changed. Thead's a fine fellow, a fine fellow! Well, come with me now." He tookrince Vasili's arm and led him to his study. As soon as they werelone together, Prince Vasili announced his hopes and wishes to theld prince.
	"Well, do you think I shall prevent her, that I can't part fromer?" said the old prince angrily. "What an idea! I'm ready for itomorrow! Only let me tell you, I want to know my son-in-law better.ou know my principles- everything aboveboard? I will ask her tomorrown your presence; if she is willing, then he can stay on. He cantay and I'll see." The old prince snorted. "Let her marry, it's allhe same to me!" he screamed in the same piercing tone as when partingrom his son.
	"I will tell you frankly," said Prince Vasili in the tone of arafty man convinced of the futility of being cunning with soeen-sighted companion. "You know, you see right through people.natole is no genius, but he is an honest, goodhearted lad; anxcellent son or kinsman."
	"All right, all right, we'll see!"
	As always happens when women lead lonely lives for any length ofime without male society, on Anatole's appearance all the three womenf Prince Bolkonski's household felt that their life had not been realill then. Their powers of reasoning, feeling, and observingmmediately increased tenfold, and their life, which seemed to haveeen passed in darkness, was suddenly lit up by a new brightness, fullf significance.
	Princess Mary grew quite unconscious of her face and coiffure. Theandsome open face of the man who might perhaps be her husbandbsorbed all her attention. He seemed to her kind, brave,etermined, manly, and magnanimous. She felt convinced of that.housands of dreams of a future family life continually rose in hermagination. She drove them away and tried to conceal them.
	"But am I not too cold with him?" thought the princess. "I try to beeserved because in the depth of my soul I feel too near to himlready, but then he cannot know what I think of him and may imaginehat I do not like him."
	And Princess Mary tried, but could not manage, to be cordial toer new guest. "Poor girl, she's devilish ugly!" thought Anatole.
	Mademoiselle Bourienne, also roused to great excitement by Anatole'srrival, thought in another way. Of course, she, a handsome youngoman without any definite position, without relations or even aountry, did not intend to devote her life to serving Princeolkonski, to reading aloud to him and being friends with Princessary. Mademoiselle Bourienne had long been waiting for a Russianrince who, able to appreciate at a glance her superiority to thelain, badly dressed, ungainly Russian princesses, would fall inove with her and carry her off; and here at last was a Russianrince. Mademoiselle Bourienne knew a story, heard from her aunt butinished in her own way, which she liked to repeat to herself. Itas the story of a girl who had been seduced, and to whom her poorother (sa pauvre mere) appeared, and reproached her for yielding to aan without being married. Mademoiselle Bourienne was often touched toears as in imagination she told this story to him, her seducer. Andow he, a real Russian prince, had appeared. He would carry her awaynd then sa pauvre mere would appear and he would marry her. So heruture shaped itself in Mademoiselle Bourienne's head at the very timehe was talking to Anatole about Paris. It was not calculation thatuided her (she did not even for a moment consider what she shouldo), but all this had long been familiar to her, and now thatnatole had appeared it just grouped itself around him and sheished and tried to please him as much as possible.
	The little princess, like an old war horse that hears the trumpet,nconsciously and quite forgetting her condition, prepared for theamiliar gallop of coquetry, without any ulterior motive or anytruggle, but with naive and lighthearted gaiety.
	Although in female society Anatole usually assumed the role of a manired of being run after by women, his vanity was flattered by thepectacle of his power over these three women. Besides that, he waseginning to feel for the pretty and provocative Mademoiselleourienne that passionate animal feeling which was apt to master himith great suddenness and prompt him to the coarsest and most recklessctions.
	After tea, the company went into the sitting room and Princessary was asked to play on the clavichord. Anatole, laughing and inigh spirits, came and leaned on his elbows, facing her and besideademoiselle Bourienne. Princess Mary felt his look with a painfullyoyous emotion. Her favorite sonata bore her into a most intimatelyoetic world and the look she felt upon her made that world still moreoetic. But Anatole's expression, though his eyes were fixed on her,eferred not to her but to the movements of Mademoiselle Bourienne'sittle foot, which he was then touching with his own under thelavichord. Mademoiselle Bourienne was also looking at Princessary, and in her lovely eyes there was a look of fearful joy andope that was also new to the princess.
	"How she loves me!" thought Princess Mary. "How happy I am now,nd how happy I may be with such a friend and such a husband! Husband?an it be possible?" she thought, not daring to look at his face,ut still feeling his eyes gazing at her.
	In the evening, after supper, when all were about to retire, Anatoleissed Princess Mary's hand. She did not know how she found theourage, but she looked straight into his handsome face as it cameear to her shortsighted eyes. Turning from Princess Mary he went upnd kissed Mademoiselle Bourienne's hand. (This was not etiquette, buthen he did everything so simply and with such assurance!)ademoiselle Bourienne flushed, and gave the princess a frightenedook.
	"What delicacy! " thought the princess. "Is it possible that Amelie"Mademoiselle Bourienne) "thinks I could be jealous of her, and notalue her pure affection and devotion to me?" She went up to her andissed her warmly. Anatole went up to kiss the little princess' hand.
	"No! No! No! When your father writes to tell me that you areehaving well I will give you my hand to kiss. Not till then!" sheaid. And smilingly raising a finger at him, she left the room.BK3|CH5
	CHAPTER V
	They all separated, but, except Anatole who fell asleep as soon ase got into bed, all kept awake a long time that night.
	"Is he really to be my husband, this stranger who is so kind- yes,ind, that is the chief thing," thought Princess Mary; and fear, whichhe had seldom experienced, came upon her. She feared to look round,t seemed to her that someone was there standing behind the screenn the dark corner. And this someone was he- the devil- and he waslso this man with the white forehead, black eyebrows, and red lips.
	She rang for her maid and asked her to sleep in her room.
	Mademoiselle Bourienne walked up and down the conservatory for aong time that evening, vainly expecting someone, now smiling atomeone, now working herself up to tears with the imaginary words ofer pauvre mere rebuking her for her fall.
	The little princess grumbled to her maid that her bed was badlyade. She could not lie either on her face or on her side. Everyosition was awkward and uncomfortable, and her burden oppressed herow more than ever because Anatole's presence had vividly recalledo her the time when she was not like that and when everything wasight and gay. She sat in an armchair in her dressing jacket andightcap and Katie, sleepy and disheveled, beat and turned the heavyeather bed for the third time, muttering to herself.
	"I told you it was all lumps and holes!" the little princessepeated. "I should be glad enough to fall asleep, so it's not myault!" and her voice quivered like that of a child about to cry.
	The old prince did not sleep either. Tikhon, half asleep, heardim pacing angrily about and snorting. The old prince felt as thoughe had been insulted through his daughter. The insult was the moreointed because it concerned not himself but another, his daughter,hom he loved more than himself. He kept telling himself that he wouldonsider the whole matter and decide what was right and how hehould act, but instead of that he only excited himself more and more.
	"The first man that turns up- she forgets her father andverything else, runs upstairs and does up her hair and wags herail and is unlike herself! Glad to throw her father over! And shenew I should notice it. Fr... fr... fr! And don't I see that thatdiot had eyes only for Bourienne- I shall have to get rid of her. Andow is it she has not pride enough to see it? If she has no prideor herself she might at least have some for my sake! She must behown that the blockhead thinks nothing of her and looks only atourienne. No, she has no pride... but I'll let her see...."
	The old prince knew that if he told his daughter she was making aistake and that Anatole meant to flirt with Mademoiselle Bourienne,rincess Mary's self-esteem would be wounded and his point (not toe parted from her) would be gained, so pacifying himself with thishought, he called Tikhon and began to undress.
	"What devil brought them here?" thought he, while Tikhon was puttinghe nightshirt over his dried-up old body and gray-haired chest. "Iever invited them. They came to disturb my life- and there is notuch of it left."
	"Devil take 'em!" he muttered, while his head was still covered byhe shirt.
	Tikhon knew his master's habit of sometimes thinking aloud, andherefore met with unaltered looks the angrily inquisitivexpression of the face that emerged from the shirt.
	"Gone to bed?" asked the prince.
	Tikhon, like all good valets, instinctively knew the direction ofis master's thoughts. He guessed that the question referred to Princeasili and his son.
	"They have gone to bed and put out their lights, your excellency."
	"No good... no good..." said the prince rapidly, and thrusting hiseet into his slippers and his arms into the sleeves of his dressingown, he went to the couch on which he slept.
	Though no words had passed between Anatole and Mademoiselleourienne, they quite understood one another as to the first part ofheir romance, up to the appearance of the pauvre mere; theynderstood that they had much to say to one another in private ando they had been seeking an opportunity since morning to meet onenother alone. When Princess Mary went to her father's room at thesual hour, Mademoiselle Bourienne and Anatole met in theonservatory.
	Princess Mary went to the door of the study with specialrepidation. It seemed to her that not only did everybody know thater fate would be decided that day, but that they also knew what shehought about it. She read this in Tikhon's face and in that of Princeasili's valet, who made her a low bow when she met him in theorridor carrying hot water.
	The old prince was very affectionate and careful in his treatment ofis daughter that morning. Princess Mary well knew this painstakingxpression of her father's. His face wore that expression when his dryands clenched with vexation at her not understanding a sum inrithmetic, when rising from his chair he would walk away from her,epeating in a low voice the same words several times over.
	He came to the point at once, treating her ceremoniously.
	"I have had a proposition made me concerning you," he said with annnatural smile. "I expect you have guessed that Prince Vasili has notome and brought his pupil with him" (for some reason Prince Bolkonskieferred to Anatole as a "pupil") "for the sake of my beautifulyes. Last night a proposition was made me on your account and, as younow my principles, I refer it to you."
	"How am I to understand you, mon pere?" said the princess, growingale and then blushing.
	"How understand me!" cried her father angrily. "Prince Vasiliinds you to his taste as a daughter-in-law and makes a proposal toou on his pupil's behalf. That's how it's to be understood! 'Hownderstand it'!... And I ask you!"
	"I do not know what you think, Father," whispered the princess.
	"I? I? What of me? Leave me out of the question. I'm not going toet married. What about you? That's what I want to know."
	The princess saw that her father regarded the matter withisapproval, but at that moment the thought occurred to her that herate would be decided now or never. She lowered her eyes so as noto see the gaze under which she felt that she could not think, butould only be able to submit from habit, and she said: "I wish only too your will, but if I had to express my own desire..." She had noime to finish. The old prince interrupted her.
	"That's admirable!" he shouted. "He will take you with your dowrynd take Mademoiselle Bourienne into the bargain. She'll be theife, while you..."
	The prince stopped. He saw the effect these words had produced onis daughter. She lowered her head and was ready to burst into tears.
	"Now then, now then, I'm only joking!" he said. "Remember this,rincess, I hold to the principle that a maiden has a full right tohoose. I give you freedom. Only remember that your life's happinessepends on your decision. Never mind me!"
	"But I do not know, Father!"
	"There's no need to talk! He receives his orders and will marryou or anybody; but you are free to choose.... Go to your room,hink it over, and come back in an hour and tell me in his presence:es or no. I know you will pray over it. Well, pray if you like, butou had better think it over. Go! Yes or no, yes or no, yes or no!" hetill shouted when the princess, as if lost in a fog, had alreadytaggered out of the study.
	Her fate was decided and happily decided. But what her father hadaid about Mademoiselle Bourienne was dreadful. It was untrue to beure, but still it was terrible, and she could not help thinking oft. She was going straight on through the conservatory, neither seeingor hearing anything, when suddenly the well-known whispering ofademoiselle Bourienne aroused her. She raised her eyes, and two stepsway saw Anatole embracing the Frenchwoman and whispering something toer. With a horrified expression on his handsome face, Anatoleooked at Princess Mary, but did not at once take his arm from theaist of Mademoiselle Bourienne who had not yet seen her.
	"Who's that? Why? Wait a moment!" Anatole's face seemed to say.rincess Mary looked at them in silence. She could not understandt. At last Mademoiselle Bourienne gave a scream and ran away. Anatoleowed to Princess Mary with a gay smile, as if inviting her to join in laugh at this strange incident, and then shrugging his shouldersent to the door that led to his own apartments.
	An hour later, Tikhon came to call Princess Mary to the oldrince; he added that Prince Vasili was also there. When Tikhon cameo her Princess Mary was sitting on the sofa in her room, holdinghe weeping Mademoiselle Bourienne in her arms and gently stroking herair. The princess' beautiful eyes with all their former calm radianceere looking with tender affection and pity at Mademoiselleourienne's pretty face.
	"No, Princess, I have lost your affection forever!" saidademoiselle Bourienne.
	"Why? I love you more than ever," said Princess Mary, "and I willry to do all I can for your happiness."
	"But you despise me. You who are so pure can never understandeing so carried away by passion. Oh, only my poor mother..."
	"I quite understand," answered Princess Mary, with a sad smile.Calm yourself, my dear. I will go to my father," she said, and wentut.
	Prince Vasili, with one leg thrown high over the other and anuffbox in his hand, was sitting there with a smile of deep emotionn his face, as if stirred to his heart's core and himselfegretting and laughing at his own sensibility, when Princess Maryntered. He hurriedly took a pinch of snuff.
	"Ah, my dear, my dear!" he began, rising and taking her by bothands. Then, sighing, he added: "My son's fate is in your hands.ecide, my dear, good, gentle Marie, whom I have always loved as aaughter!"
	He drew back and a real tear appeared in his eye.
	"Fr... fr..." snorted Prince Bolkonski. "The prince is making aroposition to you in his pupil's- I mean, his son's- name. Do youish or not to be Prince Anatole Kuragin's wife? Reply: yes or no," hehouted, "and then I shall reserve the right to state my opinion also.es, my opinion, and only my opinion," added Prince Bolkonski, turningo Prince Vasili and answering his imploring look. "Yes, or no?"
	"My desire is never to leave you, Father, never to separate myife from yours. I don't wish to marry," she answered positively,lancing at Prince Vasili and at her father with her beautiful eyes.
	"Humbug! Nonsense! Humbug, humbug, humbug!" cried Princeolkonski, frowning and taking his daughter's hand; he did not kisser, but only bending his forehead to hers just touched it, andressed her hand so that she winced and uttered a cry.
	Prince Vasili rose.
	"My dear, I must tell you that this is a moment I shall never, neverorget. But, my dear, will you not give us a little hope of touchinghis heart, so kind and generous? Say 'perhaps'... The future is soong. Say 'perhaps.'"
	"Prince, what I have said is all there is in my heart. I thank youor the honor, but I shall never be your son's wife."
	"Well, so that's finished, my dear fellow! I am very glad to haveeen you. Very glad! Go back to your rooms, Princess. Go!" said theld prince. "Very, very glad to glad to have seen you," repeated he,mbracing Prince Vasili.
	"My vocation is a different one," thought Princess Mary. "Myocation is to be happy with another kind of happiness, theappiness of love and self-sacrifice. And cost what it may, I willrrange poor Amelie's happiness, she loves him so passionately, and soassionately repents. I will do all I can to arrange the match betweenhem. If he is not rich I will give her the means; I will ask myather and Andrew. I shall be so happy when she is his wife. She is sonfortunate, a stranger, alone, helpless! And, oh God, howassionately she must love him if she could so far forget herself!erhaps I might have done the same!..." thought Princess Mary.BK3|CH6
	CHAPTER VI
	It was long since the Rostovs had news of Nicholas. Not tillidwinter was the count at last handed a letter addressed in his son'sandwriting. On receiving it, he ran on tiptoe to his study in alarmnd haste, trying to escape notice, closed the door, and began to readhe letter.
	Anna Mikhaylovna, who always knew everything that passed in theouse, on hearing of the arrival of the letter went softly into theoom and found the count with it in his hand, sobbing and laughingt the same time.
	Anna Mikhaylovna, though her circumstances had improved, was stilliving with the Rostovs.
	"My dear friend?" said she, in a tone of pathetic inquiry,repared to sympathize in any way.
	The count sobbed yet more.
	"Nikolenka... a letter... wa... a... s... wounded... my darlingoy... the countess... promoted to be an officer... thank God... Howell the little countess!"
	Anna Mikhaylovna sat down beside him, with her own handkerchiefiped the tears from his eyes and from the letter, then having drieder own eyes she comforted the count, and decided that at dinner andill teatime she would prepare the countess, and after tea, with God'selp, would inform her.
	At dinner Anna Mikhaylovna talked the whole time about the warews and about Nikolenka, twice asked when the last letter had beeneceived from him, though she knew that already, and remarked thathey might very likely be getting a letter from him that day. Eachime that these hints began to make the countess anxious and shelanced uneasily at the count and at Anna Mikhaylovna, the latter verydroitly turned the conversation to insignificant matters. Natasha,ho, of the whole family, was the most gifted with a capacity toeel any shades of intonation, look, and expression, pricked up herars from the beginning of the meal and was certain that there wasome secret between her father and Anna Mikhaylovna, that it hadomething to do with her brother, and that Anna Mikhaylovna wasreparing them for it. Bold as she was, Natasha, who knew howensitive her mother was to anything relating to Nikolenka, did notenture to ask any questions at dinner, but she was too excited to eatnything and kept wriggling about on her chair regardless of heroverness' remarks. After dinner, she rushed head long after Annaikhaylovna and, dashing at her, flung herself on her neck as soons she overtook her in the sitting room.
	"Auntie, darling, do tell me what it is!"
	"Nothing, my dear."
	"No, dearest, sweet one, honey, I won't give up- I know you knowomething."
	Anna Mikhaylovna shook her head.
	"You are a little slyboots," she said.
	"A letter from Nikolenka! I'm sure of it!" exclaimed Natasha,eading confirmation in Anna Mikhaylovna's face.
	"But for God's sake, be careful, you know how it may affect youramma."
	"I will, I will, only tell me! You won't? Then I will go and tell atnce."
	Anna Mikhaylovna, in a few words, told her the contents of theetter, on condition that she should tell no one.
	"No, on my true word of honor," said Natasha,crossing herself, "Ion't tell anyone!" and she ran off at once to Sonya.
	"Nikolenka... wounded... a letter," she announced in gleefulriumph.
	"Nicholas!" was all Sonya said, instantly turning white.
	Natasha, seeing the impression the of her brother's wound producedn Sonya, felt for the first time the sorrowful side of the news.
	She rushed to Sonya, hugged her, and began to cry.
	"A little wound, but he has been made an officer; he is well now, herote himself," said she through her tears.
	"There now! It's true that all you women are crybabies," remarkedetya, pacing the room with large, resolute strides. "Now I'm verylad, very glad indeed, that my brother has distinguished himselfo. You are all blubberers and understand nothing."
	Natasha smiled through her tears.
	"You haven't read the letter?" asked Sonya.
	"No, but she said that it was all over and that he's now anfficer."
	"Thank God!" said Sonya, crossing herself. "But perhaps she deceivedou. Let us go to Mamma."
	Petya paced the room in silence for a time.
	"If I'd been in Nikolenka's place I would have killed even more ofhose Frenchmen," he said. "What nasty brutes they are! I'd haveilled so many that there'd have been a heap of them."
	"Hold your tongue, Petya, what a goose you are!"
	"I'm not a goose, but they are who cry about trifles," said Petya.
	"Do you remember him?" Natasha suddenly asked, after a moment'silence.
	Sonya smiled.
	"Do I remember Nicholas?"
	"No, Sonya, but do you remember so that you remember himerfectly, remember everything?" said Natasha, with an expressiveesture, evidently wishing to give her words a very definiteeaning. "I remember Nikolenka too, I remember him well," she said.But I don't remember Boris. I don't remember him a bit."
	"What! You don't remember Boris?" asked Sonya in surprise.
	"It's not that I don't remember- I know what he is like, but nots I remember Nikolenka. Him- I just shut my eyes and remember, butoris... No!" (She shut her eyes.)"No! there's nothing at all."
	"Oh, Natasha!" said Sonya, looking ecstatically and earnestly at herriend as if she did not consider her worthy to hear what she meant toay and as if she were saying it to someone else, with whom joking wasut of the question, "I am in love with your brother once for all and,hatever may happen to him or to me, shall never cease to love hims long as I live."
	Natasha looked at Sonya with wondering and inquisitive eyes, andaid nothing. She felt that Sonya was speaking the truth, that thereas such love as Sonya was speaking of. But Natasha had not yet feltnything like it. She believed it could be, but did not understand it.
	"Shall you write to him?" she asked.
	Sonya became thoughtful. The question of how to write to Nicholas,nd whether she ought to write, tormented her. Now that he was alreadyn officer and a wounded hero, would it be right to remind him oferself and, as it might seem, of the obligations to her he hadaken on himself?
	"I don't know. I think if he writes, I will write too," she said,lushing.
	"And you won't feel ashamed to write to him?"
	Sonya smiled.
	"No."
	"And I should be ashamed to write to Boris. I'm not going to."
	"Why should you be ashamed?"
	"Well, I don't know. It's awkward and would make me ashamed."
	"And I know why she'd be ashamed," said Petya, offended by Natasha'srevious remark. "It's because she was in love with that fat one inpectacles" (that was how Petya described his namesake, the newount Bezukhov) "and now she's in love with that singer" (he meantatasha's Italian singing master), "that's why she's ashamed!"
	"Petya, you're a stupid!" said Natasha.
	"Not more stupid than you, madam," said the nine-year-old Petya,ith the air of an old brigadier.
	The countess had been prepared by Anna Mikhaylovna's hints atinner. On retiring to her own room, she sat in an armchair, heryes fixed on a miniature portrait of her son on the lid of anuffbox, while the tears kept coming into her eyes. Anna Mikhaylovna,ith the letter, came on tiptoe to the countess' door and paused.
	"Don't come in," she said to the old count who was following her.Come later." And she went in, closing the door behind her.
	The count put his ear to the keyhole and listened.
	At first he heard the sound of indifferent voices, then Annaikhaylovna's voice alone in a long speech, then a cry, thenilence, then both voices together with glad intonations, and thenootsteps. Anna Mikhaylovna opened the door. Her face wore the proudxpression of a surgeon who has just performed a difficult operationnd admits the public to appreciate his skill.
	"It is done!" she said to the count, pointing triumphantly to theountess, who sat holding in one hand the snuffbox with its portraitnd in the other the letter, and pressing them alternately to herips.
	When she saw the count, she stretched out her arms to him,mbraced his bald head, over which she again looked at the letternd the portrait, and in order to press them again to her lips, shelightly pushed away the bald head. Vera, Natasha, Sonya, and Petyaow entered the room, and the reading of the letter began. After arief description of the campaign and the two battles in which head taken part, and his promotion, Nicholas said that he kissed hisather's and mother's hands asking for their blessing, and that heissed Vera, Natasha, and Petya. Besides that, he sent greetings toonsieur Schelling, Madame Schoss, and his old nurse, and asked themo kiss for him "dear Sonya, whom he loved and thought of just theame as ever." When she heard this Sonya blushed so that tears camento her eyes and, unable to bear the looks turned upon her, ranway into the dancing hall, whirled round it at full speed with herress puffed out like a balloon, and, flushed and smiling, plumpedown on the floor. The countess was crying.
	"Why are you crying, Mamma?" asked Vera. "From all he says onehould be glad and not cry."
	This was quite true, but the count, the countess, and Natasha lookedt her reproachfully. "And who is it she takes after?" thought theountess.
	Nicholas' letter was read over hundreds of times, and those who wereonsidered worthy to hear it had to come to the countess, for sheid not let it out of her hands. The tutors came, and the nurses,nd Dmitri, and several acquaintances, and the countess reread theetter each time with fresh pleasure and each time discovered in itresh proofs of Nikolenka's virtues. How strange, how extraordinary,ow joyful it seemed, that her son, the scarcely perceptible motion ofhose tiny limbs she had felt twenty years ago within her, that sonbout whom she used to have quarrels with the too indulgent count,hat son who had first learned to say "pear" and then "granny," thathis son should now be away in a foreign land amid strangeurroundings, a manly warrior doing some kind of man's work of hiswn, without help or guidance. The universal experience of ages,howing that children do grow imperceptibly from the cradle toanhood, did not exist for the countess. Her son's growth towardanhood, at each of its stages, had seemed as extraordinary to hers if there had never existed the millions of human beings who grew upn the same way. As twenty years before, it seemed impossible that theittle creature who lived somewhere under her heart would ever cry,uck her breast, and begin to speak, so now she could not believe thathat little creature could be this strong, brave man, this model sonnd officer that, judging by this letter, he now was.
	"What a style! How charmingly he describes!" said she, reading theescriptive part of the letter. "And what a soul! Not a word aboutimself.... Not a word! About some Denisov or other, though heimself, I dare say, is braver than any of them. He says nothing aboutis sufferings. What a heart! How like him it is! And how he hasemembered everybody! Not forgetting anyone. I always said when he wasnly so high- I always said...."
	For more than a week preparations were being made, rough drafts ofetters to Nicholas from all the household were written and copiedut, while under the supervision of the countess and the solicitude ofhe count, money and all things necessary for the uniform andquipment of the newly commissioned officer were collected. Annaikhaylovna, practical woman that she was, had even managed by favorith army authorities to secure advantageous means of communicationor herself and her son. She had opportunities of sending heretters to the Grand Duke Constantine Pavlovich, who commanded theuards. The Rostovs supposed that The Russian Guards, Abroad, wasuite a definite address, and that if a letter reached the Granduke in command of the Guards there was no reason why it should noteach the Pavlograd regiment, which was presumably somewhere in theame neighborhood. And so it was decided to send the letters and moneyy the Grand Duke's courier to Boris and Boris was to forward themo Nicholas. The letters were from the old count, the countess, Petya,era, Natasha, and Sonya, and finally there were six thousand rublesor his outfit and various other things the old count sent to his son.BK3|CH7
	CHAPTER VII
	On the twelfth of November, Kutuzov's active army, in camp beforelmutz, was preparing to be reviewed next day by the two Emperors- theussian and the Austrian. The Guards, just arrived from Russia,pent the night ten miles from Olmutz and next morning were to cometraight to the review, reaching the field at Olmutz by ten o'clock.
	That day Nicholas Rostov received a letter from Boris, telling himhat the Ismaylov regiment was quartered for the night ten milesrom Olmutz and that he wanted to see him as he had a letter and moneyor him. Rostov was particularly in need of money now that the troops,fter their active service, were stationed near Olmutz and the campwarmed with well-provisioned sutlers and Austrian Jews offering allorts of tempting wares. The Pavlograds held feast after feast,elebrating awards they had received for the campaign, and madexpeditions to Olmutz to visit a certain Caroline the Hungarian, whoad recently opened a restaurant there with girls as waitresses.ostov, who had just celebrated his promotion to a cornetcy and boughtenisov's horse, Bedouin, was in debt all round, to his comrades andhe sutlers. On receiving Boris' letter he rode with a fellowfficer to Olmutz, dined there, drank a bottle of wine, and then setff alone to the Guards' camp to find his old playmate. Rostov had notet had time to get his uniform. He had on a shabby cadet jacket,ecorated with a soldier's cross, equally shabby cadet's ridingreeches lined with worn leather, and an officer's saber with aword knot. The Don horse he was riding was one he had bought from aossack during the campaign, and he wore a crumpled hussar cap stuckauntily back on one side of his head. As he rode up to the camp hehought how he would impress Boris and all his comrades of theuards by his appearance- that of a fighting hussar who had been underire.
	The Guards had made their whole march as if on a pleasure trip,arading their cleanliness and discipline. They had come by easytages, their knapsacks conveyed on carts, and the Austrianuthorities had provided excellent dinners for the officers at everyalting place. The regiments had entered and left the town withheir bands playing, and by the Grand Duke's orders the men hadarched all the way in step (a practice on which the Guards pridedhemselves), the officers on foot and at their proper posts. Boris hadeen quartered, and had marched all the way, with Berg who was alreadyn command of a company. Berg, who had obtained his captaincy duringhe campaign, had gained the confidence of his superiors by hisromptitude and accuracy and had arranged his money matters veryatisfactorily. Boris, during the campaign, had made thecquaintance of many persons who might prove useful to him, and by aetter of recommendation he had brought from Pierre had becomecquainted with Prince Andrew Bolkonski, through whom he hoped tobtain a post on the commander in chief's staff. Berg and Boris,aving rested after yesterday's march, were sitting, clean andeatly dressed, at a round table in the clean quarters allotted tohem, playing chess. Berg held a smoking pipe between his knees.oris, in the accurate way characteristic of him, was building aittle pyramid of chessmen with his delicate white fingers whilewaiting Berg's move, and watched his opponent's face, evidentlyhinking about the game as he always thought only of whatever he wasngaged on.
	"Well, how are you going to get out of that?" he remarked.
	"We'll try to," replied Berg, touching a pawn and then removingis hand.
	At that moment the door opened.
	"Here he is at last!" shouted Rostov. "And Berg too! Oh, youetisenfans, allay cushay dormir!" he exclaimed, imitating his Russianurse's French, at which he and Boris used to laugh long ago.
	"Dear me, how you have changed!"
	Boris rose to meet Rostov, but in doing so did not omit to steadynd replace some chessmen that were falling. He was about to embraceis friend, but Nicholas avoided him. With that peculiar feeling ofouth, that dread of beaten tracks, and wish to express itself in aanner different from that of its elders which is often insincere,icholas wished to do something special on meeting his friend. Heanted to pinch him, push him, do anything but kiss him- a thingverybody did. But notwithstanding this, Boris embraced him in auiet, friendly way and kissed him three times.
	They had not met for nearly half a year and, being at the age whenoung men take their first steps on life's road, each saw immensehanges in the other, quite a new reflection of the society in whichhey had taken those first steps. Both had changed greatly sincehey last met and both were in a hurry to show the changes that hadaken place in them.
	"Oh, you damned dandies! Clean and fresh as if you'd been to a fete,ot like us sinners of the line," cried Rostov, with martial swaggernd with baritone notes in his voice, new to Boris, pointing to hiswn mud-bespattered breeches. The German landlady, hearing Rostov'soud voice, popped her head in at the door.
	"Eh, is she pretty?" he asked with a wink.
	"Why do you shout so? You'll frighten them!" said Boris. "I didot expect you today," he added. "I only sent you the note yesterdayy Bolkonski- an adjutant of Kutuzov's, who's a friend of mine. Iid not think he would get it to you so quickly.... Well, how are you?een under fire already?" asked Boris.
	Without answering, Rostov shook the soldier's Cross of St. Georgeastened to the cording of his uniform and, indicating a bandaged arm,lanced at Berg with a smile.
	"As you see," he said.
	"Indeed? Yes, yes!" said Boris, with a smile. "And we too have had aplendid march. You know, of course, that His Imperial Highness rodeith our regiment all the time, so that we had every comfort and everydvantage. What receptions we had in Poland! What dinners and balls! Ian't tell you. And the Tsarevich was very gracious to all ourfficers."
	And the two friends told each other of their doings, the one ofis hussar revels and life in the fighting line, the other of theleasures and advantages of service under members of the Imperialamily.
	"Oh, you Guards!" said Rostov. "I say, send for some wine."
	Boris made a grimace.
	"If you really want it," said he.
	He went to his bed, drew a purse from under the clean pillow, andent for wine.
	"Yes, and I have some money and a letter to give you," he added.
	Rostov took the letter and, throwing the money on the sofa, put bothrms on the table and began to read. After reading a few lines, helanced angrily at Berg, then, meeting his eyes, hid his face behindhe letter.
	"Well, they've sent you a tidy sum," said Berg, eying the heavyurse that sank into the sofa. "As for us, Count, we get along onur pay. I can tell you for myself..."
	"I say, Berg, my dear fellow," said Rostov, "when you get a letterrom home and meet one of your own people whom you want to talkverything over with, and I happen to be there, I'll go at once, to beut of your way! Do go somewhere, anywhere... to the devil!" hexclaimed, and immediately seizing him by the shoulder and lookingmiably into his face, evidently wishing to soften the rudeness of hisords, he added, "Don't be hurt, my dear fellow; you know I speak fromy heart as to an old acquaintance."
	"Oh, don't mention it, Count! I quite understand," said Berg,etting up and speaking in a muffled and guttural voice.
	"Go across to our hosts: they invited you," added Boris.
	Berg put on the cleanest of coats, without a spot or speck ofust, stood before a looking glass and brushed the hair on his templespwards, in the way affected by the Emperor Alexander, and, havingssured himself from the way Rostov looked at it that his coat hadeen noticed, left the room with a pleasant smile.
	"Oh dear, what a beast I am!" muttered Rostov, as he read theetter.
	"Why?"
	"Oh, what a pig I am, not to have written and to have given themuch a fright! Oh, what a pig I am!" he repeated, flushing suddenly.Well, have you sent Gabriel for some wine? All right let's haveome!"
	In the letter from his parents was enclosed a letter ofecommendation to Bagration which the old countess at Annaikhaylovna's advice had obtained through an acquaintance and sento her son, asking him to take it to its destination and make use oft.
	"What nonsense! Much I need it!" said Rostov, throwing the letternder the table.
	"Why have you thrown that away?" asked Boris.
	"It is some letter of recommendation... what the devil do I wantt for!"
	"Why 'What the devil'?" said Boris, picking it up and reading theddress. "This letter would be of great use to you."
	"I want nothing, and I won't be anyone's adjutant."
	"Why not?" inquired Boris.
	"It's a lackey's job!"
	"You are still the same dreamer, I see," remarked Boris, shaking hisead.
	"And you're still the same diplomatist! But that's not theoint... Come, how are you?" asked Rostov.
	"Well, as you see. So far everything's all right, but I confess Ihould much like to be an adjutant and not remain at the front."
	"Why?"
	"Because when once a man starts on military service, he should tryo make as successful a career of it as possible."
	"Oh, that's it!" said Rostov, evidently thinking of something else.
	He looked intently and inquiringly into his friend's eyes, evidentlyrying in vain to find the answer to some question.
	Old Gabriel brought in the wine.
	"Shouldn't we now send for Berg?" asked Boris. "He would drinkith you. I can't."
	"Well, send for him... and how do you get on with that German?"sked Rostov, with a contemptuous smile.
	"He is a very, very nice, honest, and pleasant fellow," answeredoris.
	Again Rostov looked intently into Boris' eyes and sighed. Bergeturned, and over the bottle of wine conversation between the threefficers became animated. The Guardsmen told Rostov of their march andow they had been made much of in Russia, Poland, and abroad. Theypoke of the sayings and doings of their commander, the Grand Duke,nd told stories of his kindness and irascibility. Berg, as usual,ept silent when the subject did not relate to himself, but inonnection with the stories of the Grand Duke's quick temper heelated with gusto how in Galicia he had managed to deal with therand Duke when the latter made a tour of the regiments and wasnnoyed at the irregularity of a movement. With a pleasant smileerg related how the Grand Duke had ridden up to him in a violentassion, shouting: "Arnauts!" ("Arnauts" was the Tsarevich'savorite expression when he was in a rage) and called for theompany commander.
	"Would you believe it, Count, I was not at all alarmed, because Inew I was right. Without boasting, you know, I may say that I knowhe Army Orders by heart and know the Regulations as well as I dohe Lord's Prayer. So, Count, there never is any negligence in myompany, and so my conscience was at ease. I came forward...." (Bergtood up and showed how he presented himself, with his hand to hisap, and really it would have been difficult for a face to expressreater respect and self-complacency than his did.) "Well, hetormed at me, as the saying is, stormed and stormed and stormed! Itas not a matter of life but rather of death, as the saying is.Albanians!' and 'devils!' and 'To Siberia!'" said Berg with aagacious smile. "I knew I was in the right so I kept silent; wasot that best, Count?... 'Hey, are you dumb?' he shouted. Still Iemained silent. And what do you think, Count? The next day it was notven mentioned in the Orders of the Day. That's what keeping one'sead means. That's the way, Count," said Berg, lighting his pipe andmitting rings of smoke.
	"Yes, that was fine," said Rostov, smiling.
	But Boris noticed that he was preparing to make fun of Berg, andkillfully changed the subject. He asked him to tell them how andhere he got his wound. This pleased Rostov and he began talking aboutt, and as he went on became more and more animated. He told them ofis Schon Grabern affair, just as those who have taken part in aattle generally do describe it, that is, as they would like it toave been, as they have heard it described by others, and as soundsell, but not at all as it really was. Rostov was a truthful young mannd would on no account have told a deliberate lie. He began his storyeaning to tell everything just as it happened, but imperceptibly,nvoluntarily, and inevitably he lapsed into falsehood. If he had toldhe truth to his hearers- who like himself had often heard storiesf attacks and had formed a definite idea of what an attack was andere expecting to hear just such a story- they would either not haveelieved him or, still worse, would have thought that Rostov wasimself to blame since what generally happens to the narrators ofavalry attacks had not happened to him. He could not tell them simplyhat everyone went at a trot and that he fell off his horse andprained his arm and then ran as hard as he could from a Frenchmannto the wood. Besides, to tell everything as it really happened, itould have been necessary to make an effort of will to tell onlyhat happened. It is very difficult to tell the truth, and youngeople are rarely capable of it. His hearers expected a story of howeside himself and all aflame with excitement, he had flown like atorm at the square, cut his way in, slashed right and left, how hisaber had tasted flesh and he had fallen exhausted, and so on. Ando he told them all that.
	In the middle of his story, just as he was saying: "You cannotmagine what a strange frenzy one experiences during an attack,"rince Andrew, whom Boris was expecting, entered the room. Princendrew, who liked to help young men, was flattered by being askedor his assistance and being well disposed toward Boris, who hadanaged to please him the day before, he wished to do what the youngan wanted. Having been sent with papers from Kutuzov to thesarevich, he looked in on Boris, hoping to find him alone. When heame in and saw an hussar of the line recounting his military exploitsPrince Andrew could not endure that sort of man), he gave Boris aleasant smile, frowned as with half-closed eyes he looked atostov, bowed slightly and wearily, and sat down languidly on theofa: he felt it unpleasant to have dropped in on bad company.ostov flushed up on noticing this, but he did not care, this was aere stranger. Glancing, however, at Boris, he saw that he tooeemed ashamed of the hussar of the line.
	In spite of Prince Andrew's disagreeable, ironical tone, in spite ofhe contempt with which Rostov, from his fighting army point ofiew, regarded all these little adjutants on the staff of whom theewcomer was evidently one, Rostov felt confused, blushed, andecame silent. Boris inquired what news there might be on the staff,nd what, without indiscretion, one might ask about our plans.
	"We shall probably advance," replied Bolkonski, evidentlyeluctant to say more in the presence of a stranger.
	Berg took the opportunity to ask, with great politeness, whether, asas rumored, the allowance of forage money to captains of companiesould be doubled. To this Prince Andrew answered with a smile thate could give no opinion on such an important government order, anderg laughed gaily.
	"As to your business," Prince Andrew continued, addressing Boris,we will talk of it later" (and he looked round at Rostov). "Come toe after the review and we will do what is possible."
	And, having glanced round the room, Prince Andrew turned toostov, whose state of unconquerable childish embarrassment nowhanging to anger he did not condescend to notice, and said: "Ihink you were talking of the Schon Grabern affair? Were you there?"
	"I was there," said Rostov angrily, as if intending to insult theide-de-camp.
	Bolkonski noticed the hussar's state of mind, and it amused him.ith a slightly contemptuous smile, he said: "Yes, there are manytories now told about that affair!"
	"Yes, stories!" repeated Rostov loudly, looking with eyes suddenlyrown furious, now at Boris, now at Bolkonski. "Yes, many stories! Butur stories are the stories of men who have been under the enemy'sire! Our stories have some weight, not like the stories of thoseellows on the staff who get rewards without doing anything!"
	"Of whom you imagine me to be one?" said Prince Andrew, with a quietnd particularly amiable smile.
	A strange feeling of exasperation and yet of respect for thisan's self-possession mingled at that moment in Rostov's soul.
	"I am not talking about you," he said, "I don't know you and,rankly, I don't want to. I am speaking of the staff in general."
	"And I will tell you this," Prince Andrew interrupted in a tone ofuiet authority, "you wish to insult me, and I am ready to agreeith you that it would be very easy to do so if you haven't sufficientelf-respect, but admit that the time and place are very badly chosen.n a day or two we shall all have to take part in a greater and moreerious duel, and besides, Drubetskoy, who says he is an old friend ofours, is not at all to blame that my face has the misfortune toisplease you. However," he added rising, "you know my name andhere to find me, but don't forget that I do not regard eitheryself or you as having been at all insulted, and as a man olderhan you, my advice is to let the matter drop. Well then, on Fridayfter the review I shall expect you, Drubetskoy. Au revoir!" exclaimedrince Andrew, and with a bow to them both he went out.
	Only when Prince Andrew was gone did Rostov think of what he oughto have said. And he was still more angry at having omitted to say it.e ordered his horse at once and, coldly taking leave of Boris, rodeome. Should he go to headquarters next day and challenge thatffected adjutant, or really let the matter drop, was the questionhat worried him all the way. He thought angrily of the pleasure heould have at seeing the fright of that small and frail but proudan when covered by his pistol, and then he felt with surprise that ofll the men he knew there was none he would so much like to have for ariend as that very adjutant whom he so hated.BK3|CH8
	CHAPTER VIII
	The day after Rostov had been to see Boris, a review was held of theustrian and Russian troops, both those freshly arrived from Russiand those who had been campaigning under Kutuzov. The two Emperors,he Russian with his heir the Tsarevich, and the Austrian with therchduke, inspected the allied army of eighty thousand men.
	From early morning the smart clean troops were on the move,orming up on the field before the fortress. Now thousands of feet andayonets moved and halted at the officers' command, turned withanners flying, formed up at intervals, and wheeled round otherimilar masses of infantry in different uniforms; now was heard thehythmic beat of hoofs and the jingling of showy cavalry in blue, red,nd green braided uniforms, with smartly dressed bandsmen in frontounted on black, roan, or gray horses; then again, spreading out withhe brazen clatter of the polished shining cannon that quivered on theun carriages and with the smell of linstocks, came the artilleryhich crawled between the infantry and cavalry and took up itsppointed position. Not only the generals in full parade uniforms,ith their thin or thick waists drawn in to the utmost, their redecks squeezed into their stiff collars, and wearing scarves and allheir decorations, not only the elegant, pomaded officers, but everyoldier with his freshly washed and shaven face and his weaponslean and polished to the utmost, and every horse groomed till itsoat shone like satin and every hair of its wetted mane lay smooth-elt that no small matter was happening, but an important and solemnffair. Every general and every soldier was conscious of his ownnsignificance, aware of being but a drop in that ocean of men, andet at the same time was conscious of his strength as a part of thatnormous whole.
	From early morning strenuous activities and efforts had begun and byen o'clock all had been brought into due order. The ranks wererown up on the vast field. The whole army was extended in threeines: the cavalry in front, behind it the artillery, and behindhat again the infantry.
	A space like a street was left between each two lines of troops. Thehree parts of that army were sharply distinguished: Kutuzov'sighting army (with the Pavlograds on the right flank of the front);hose recently arrived from Russia, both Guards and regiments of theine; and the Austrian troops. But they all stood in the same lines,nder one command, and in a like order.
	Like wind over leaves ran an excited whisper: "They're coming!hey're coming!" Alarmed voices were heard, and a stir of finalreparation swept over all the troops.
	From the direction of Olmutz in front of them, a group was seenpproaching. And at that moment, though the day was still, a lightust of wind blowing over the army slightly stirred the streamers onhe lances and the unfolded standards fluttered against theirtaffs. It looked as if by that slight motion the army itself wasxpressing its joy at the approach of the Emperors. One voice waseard shouting: "Eyes front!" Then, like the crowing of cocks atunrise, this was repeated by others from various sides and all becameilent.
	In the deathlike stillness only the tramp of horses was heard.his was the Emperors' suites. The Emperors rode up to the flank,nd the trumpets of the first cavalry regiment played the generalarch. It seemed as though not the trumpeters were playing, but asf the army itself, rejoicing at the Emperors' approach, had naturallyurst into music. Amid these sounds, only the youthful kindly voice ofhe Emperor Alexander was clearly heard. He gave the words ofreeting, and the first regiment roared "Hurrah!" so deafeningly,ontinuously, and joyfully that the men themselves were awed byheir multitude and the immensity of the power they constituted.
	Rostov, standing in the front lines of Kutuzov's army which the Tsarpproached first, experienced the same feeling as every other man inhat army: a feeling of self-forgetfulness, a proud consciousness ofight, and a passionate attraction to him who was the cause of thisriumph.
	He felt that at a single word from that man all this vast massand he himself an insignificant atom in it) would go through fire andater, commit crime, die, or perform deeds of highest heroism, ando he could not but tremble and his heart stand still at the imminencef that word.
	"Hurrah! Hurrah! Hurrah!" thundered from all sides, one regimentfter another greeting the Tsar with the strains of the march, andhen "Hurrah!"... Then the general march, and again "Hurrah!urrah!" growing ever stronger and fuller and merging into a deafeningoar.
	Till the Tsar reached it, each regiment in its silence andmmobility seemed like a lifeless body, but as soon as he came up itecame alive, its thunder joining the roar of the whole line alonghich he had already passed. Through the terrible and deafening roarf those voices, amid the square masses of troops standingotionless as if turned to stone, hundreds of riders composing theuites moved carelessly but symmetrically and above all freely, and inront of them two men- the Emperors. Upon them the undivided,ensely passionate attention of that whole mass of men wasoncentrated.
	The handsome young Emperor Alexander, in the uniform of the Horseuards, wearing a cocked hat with its peaks front and back, with hisleasant face and resonant though not loud voice, attracted everyone'sttention.
	Rostov was not far from the trumpeters, and with his keen sightad recognized the Tsar and watched his approach. When he was withinwenty paces, and Nicholas could clearly distinguish every detail ofis handsome, happy young face, he experienced a feeling tendernessnd ecstasy such as he had never before known. Every trait and everyovement of the Tsar's seemed to him enchanting.
	Stopping in front of the Pavlograds, the Tsar said something inrench to the Austrian Emperor and smiled.
	Seeing that smile, Rostov involuntarily smiled himself and felt atill stronger flow of love for his sovereign. He longed to showhat love in some way and knowing that this was impossible was readyo cry. The Tsar called the colonel of the regiment and said a fewords to him.
	"Oh God, what would happen to me if the Emperor spoke to me?"hought Rostov. "I should die of happiness!"
	The Tsar addressed the officers also: "I thank you all, gentlemen, Ihank you with my whole heart." To Rostov every word sounded like aoice from heaven. How gladly would he have died at once for his Tsar!
	"You have earned the St. George's standards and will be worthy ofhem."
	"Oh, to die, to die for him " thought Rostov.
	The Tsar said something more which Rostov did not hear, and theoldiers, straining their lungs, shouted "Hurrah!"
	Rostov too, bending over his saddle, shouted "Hurrah!" with allis might, feeling that he would like to injure himself by that shout,f only to express his rapture fully.
	The Tsar stopped a few minutes in front of the hussars as ifndecided.
	"How can the Emperor be undecided?" thought Rostov, but then evenhis indecision appeared to him majestic and enchanting, likeverything else the Tsar did.
	That hesitation lasted only an instant. The Tsar's foot, in thearrow pointed boot then fashionable, touched the groin of theobtailed bay mare he rode, his hand in a white glove gathered uphe reins, and he moved off accompanied by an irregularly swayingea of aides-de-camp. Farther and farther he rode away, stopping atther regiments, till at last only his white plumes were visible toostov from amid the suites that surrounded the Emperors.
	Among the gentlemen of the suite, Rostov noticed Bolkonski,itting his horse indolently and carelessly. Rostov recalled theiruarrel of yesterday and the question presented itself whether heught or ought not to challenge Bolkonski. "Of course not!" he nowhought. "Is it worth thinking or speaking of it at such a moment?t a time of such love, such rapture, and such self-sacrifice, what dony of our quarrels and affronts matter? I love and forgiveverybody now."
	When the Emperor had passed nearly all the regiments, the troopsegan a ceremonial march past him, and Rostov on Bedouin, recentlyurchased from Denisov, rode past too, at the rear of his squadron-hat is, alone and in full view of the Emperor.
	Before he reached him, Rostov, who was a splendid horseman,purred Bedouin twice and successfully put him to the showy trot inhich the animal went when excited. Bending his foaming muzzle tois chest, his tail extended, Bedouin, as if also conscious of themperor's eye upon him, passed splendidly, lifting his feet with aigh and graceful action, as if flying through the air withoutouching the ground.
	Rostov himself, his legs well back and his stomach drawn in andeeling himself one with his horse, rode past the Emperor with arowning but blissful face "like a vewy devil," as Denisov expressedt.
	"Fine fellows, the Pavlograds!" remarked the Emperor.
	"My God, how happy I should be if he ordered me to leap into theire this instant!" thought Rostov.
	When the review was over, the newly arrived officers, and alsoutuzov's, collected in groups and began to talk about the awards,bout the Austrians and their uniforms, about their lines, aboutonaparte, and how badly the latter would fare now, especially ifhe Essen corps arrived and Prussia took our side.
	But the talk in every group was chiefly about the Emperor Alexander.is every word and movement was described with ecstasy.
	They all had but one wish: to advance as soon as possible againsthe enemy under the Emperor's command. Commanded by the Emperorimself they could not fail to vanquish anyone, be it whom it might:o thought Rostov and most of the officers after the review.
	All were then more confident of victory than the winning of twoattles would have made them.BK3|CH9
	CHAPTER IX
	The day after the review, Boris, in his best uniform and with hisomrade Berg's best wishes for success, rode to Olmutz to seeolkonski, wishing to profit by his friendliness and obtain forimself the best post he could- preferably that of adjutant to somemportant personage, a position in the army which seemed to him mostttractive. "It is all very well for Rostov, whose father sends himen thousand rubles at a time, to talk about not wishing to cringeo anybody and not be anyone's lackey, but I who have nothing but myrains have to make a career and must not miss opportunities, but mustvail myself of them!" he reflected.
	He did not find Prince Andrew in Olmutz that day, but the appearancef the town where the headquarters and the diplomatic corps weretationed and the two Emperors were living with their suites,ouseholds, and courts only strengthened his desire to belong tohat higher world.
	He knew no one, and despite his smart Guardsman's uniform, all thesexalted personages passing in the streets in their elegant carriagesith their plumes, ribbons, and medals, both courtiers and militaryen, seemed so immeasurably above him, an insignificant officer of theuards, that they not only did not wish to, but simply could not, beware of his existence. At the quarters of the commander in chief,utuzov, where he inquired for Bolkonski, all the adjutants and evenhe orderlies looked at him as if they wished to impress on him that areat many officers like him were always coming there and thatverybody was heartily sick of them. In spite of this, or ratherecause of it, next day, November 15, after dinner he again went tolmutz and, entering the house occupied by Kutuzov, asked forolkonski. Prince Andrew was in and Boris was shown into a largeall probably formerly used for dancing, but in which five beds nowtood, and furniture of various kinds: a table, chairs, and alavichord. One adjutant, nearest the door, was sitting at the tablen a Persian dressing gown, writing. Another, the red, stoutesvitski, lay on a bed with his arms under his head, laughing with anfficer who had sat down beside him. A third was playing a Viennesealtz on the clavichord, while a fourth, lying on the clavichord, sanghe tune. Bolkonski was not there. None of these gentlemen changed hisosition on seeing Boris. The one who was writing and whom Borisddressed turned round crossly and told him Bolkonski was on dutynd that he should go through the door on the left into theeception room if he wished to see him. Boris thanked him and wento the reception room, where he found some ten officers and generals.
	When he entered, Prince Andrew, his eyes drooping contemptuouslywith that peculiar expression of polite weariness which plainly says,If it were not my duty I would not talk to you for a moment"), wasistening to an old Russian general with decorations, who stood veryrect, almost on tiptoe, with a soldier's obsequious expression on hisurple face, reporting something.
	"Very well, then, be so good as to wait," said Prince Andrew tohe general, in Russian, speaking with the French intonation heffected when he wished to speak contemptuously, and noticing Boris,rince Andrew, paying no more heed to the general who ran after himmploring him to hear something more, nodded and turned to him with cheerful smile.
	At that moment Boris clearly realized what he had before surmised,hat in the army, besides the subordination and disciplinerescribed in the military code, which he and the others knew in theegiment, there was another, more important, subordination, which madehis tight-laced, purple-faced general wait respectfully while Captainrince Andrew, for his own pleasure, chose to chat with Lieutenantrubetskoy. More than ever was Boris resolved to serve in future notccording to the written code, but under this unwritten law. He feltow that merely by having been recommended to Prince Andrew he hadlready risen above the general who at the front had the power tonnihilate him, a lieutenant of the Guards. Prince Andrew came up toim and took his hand.
	"I am very sorry you did not find me in yesterday. I was fussingbout with Germans all day. We went with Weyrother to survey theispositions. When Germans start being accurate, there's no end tot!"
	Boris smiled, as if he understood what Prince Andrew was alluding tos something generally known. But it the first time he had heardeyrother's name, or even the term "dispositions."
	"Well, my dear fellow, so you still want to be an adjutant? I haveeen thinking about you."
	"Yes, I was thinking"- for some reason Boris could not helplushing- "of asking the commander in chief. He has had a letterrom Prince Kuragin about me. I only wanted to ask because I fearhe Guards won't be in action," he added as if in apology.
	"All right, all right. We'll talk it over," replied Prince Andrew.Only let me report this gentleman's business, and I shall be atour disposal."
	While Prince Andrew went to report about the purple-faced general,hat gentleman- evidently not sharing Boris' conception of thedvantages of the unwritten code of subordination- looked so fixedlyt the presumptuous lieutenant who had prevented his finishing what head to say to the adjutant that Boris felt uncomfortable. He turnedway and waited impatiently for Prince Andrew's return from theommander in chief's room.
	"You see, my dear fellow, I have been thinking about you," saidrince Andrew when they had gone into the large room where thelavichord was. "It's no use your going to the commander in chief.e would say a lot of pleasant things, ask you to dinner" ("That wouldot be bad as regards the unwritten code," thought Boris), "butothing more would come of it. There will soon be a battalion of usides-de-camp and adjutants! But this is what we'll do: I have aood friend, an adjutant general and an excellent fellow, Princeolgorukov; and though you may not know it, the fact is that nowutuzov with his staff and all of us count for nothing. Everythings now centered round the Emperor. So we will go to Dolgorukov; I haveo go there anyhow and I have already spoken to him about you. Wehall see whether he cannot attach you to himself or find a placeor you somewhere nearer the sun."
	Prince Andrew always became specially keen when he had to guide aoung man and help him to worldly success. Under cover of obtainingelp of this kind for another, which from pride he would neverccept for himself, he kept in touch with the circle which confersuccess and which attracted him. He very readily took up Boris'ause and went with him to Dolgorukov.
	It was late in the evening when they entered the palace at Olmutzccupied by the Emperors and their retinues.
	That same day a council of war had been held in which all theembers of the Hofkriegsrath and both Emperors took part. At thatouncil, contrary to the views of the old generals Kutuzov andrince Schwartzenberg, it had been decided to advance immediatelynd give battle to Bonaparte. The council of war was just over whenrince Andrew accompanied by Boris arrived at the palace to findolgorukov. Everyone at headquarters was still under the spell ofhe day's council, at which the party of the young had triumphed.he voices of those who counseled delay and advised waiting foromething else before advancing had been so completely silenced andheir arguments confuted by such conclusive evidence of the advantagesf attacking that what had been discussed at the council- the comingattle and the victory that would certainly result from it- noonger seemed to be in the future but in the past. All thedvantages were on our side. Our enormous forces, undoubtedly superioro Napoleon's, were concentrated in one place, the troops inspiredy the Emperors' presence were eager for action. The strategicosition where the operations would take place was familiar in all itsetails to the Austrian General Weyrother: a lucky accident hadrdained that the Austrian army should maneuver the previous year onhe very fields where the French had now to be fought; the adjacentocality was known and shown in every detail on the maps, andonaparte, evidently weakened, was undertaking nothing.
	Dolgorukov, one of the warmest advocates of an attack, had justeturned from the council, tired and exhausted but eager and proudf the victory that had been gained. Prince Andrew introduced hisrotege, but Prince Dolgorukov politely and firmly pressing his handaid nothing to Boris and, evidently unable to suppress the thoughtshich were uppermost in his mind at that moment, addressed Princendrew in French.
	"Ah, my dear fellow, what a battle we have gained! God grant thathe one that will result from it will be as victorious! However,ear fellow," he said abruptly and eagerly, "I must confess toaving been unjust to the Austrians and especially to Weyrother.hat exactitude, what minuteness, what knowledge of the locality, whatoresight for every eventuality, every possibility even to themallest detail! No, my dear fellow, no conditions better than ourresent ones could have been devised. This combination of Austrianrecision with Russian valor- what more could be wished for?"
	"So the attack is definitely resolved on?" asked Bolkonski.
	"And do you know, my dear fellow, it seems to me that Bonaparteas decidedly lost bearings, you know that a letter was receivedrom him today for the Emperor." Dolgorukov smiled significantly.
	"Is that so? And what did he say?" inquired Bolkonski.
	"What can he say? Tra-di-ri-di-ra and so on... merely to gainime. I tell you he is in our hands, that's certain! But what was mostmusing," he continued, with a sudden, good-natured laugh, "was thate could not think how to address the reply! If not as 'Consul' and ofourse not as 'Emperor,' it seemed to me it should be to 'Generalonaparte.'"
	"But between not recognizing him as Emperor and calling himeneral Bonaparte, there is a difference," remarked Bolkonski.
	"That's just it," interrupted Dolgorukov quickly, laughing. "Younow Bilibin- he's a very clever fellow. He suggested addressing hims 'Usurper and Enemy of Mankind.'"
	Dolgorukov laughed merrily.
	"Only that?" said Bolkonski.
	"All the same, it was Bilibin who found a suitable form for theddress. He is a wise and clever fellow."
	"What was it?"
	"To the Head of the French Government... Au chef du gouvernementrancais," said Dolgorukov, with grave satisfaction. "Good, wasn'tt?"
	"Yes, but he will dislike it extremely," said Bolkonski.
	"Oh yes, very much! My brother knows him, he's dined with him- theresent Emperor- more than once in Paris, and tells me he never met more cunning or subtle diplomatist- you know, a combination ofrench adroitness and Italian play-acting! Do you know the talebout him and Count Markov? Count Markov was the only man who knew howo handle him. You know the story of the handkerchief? It iselightful!"
	And the talkative Dolgorukov, turning now to Boris, now to Princendrew, told how Bonaparte wishing to test Markov, our ambassador,urposely dropped a handkerchief in front of him and stood lookingt Markov, probably expecting Markov to pick it up for him, and howarkov immediately dropped his own beside it and picked it upithout touching Bonaparte's.
	"Delightful!" said Bolkonski. "But I have come to you, Prince, as petitioner on behalf of this young man. You see..." but beforerince Andrew could finish, an aide-de-camp came in to summonolgorukov to the Emperor.
	"Oh, what a nuisance," said Dolgorukov, getting up hurriedly andressing the hands of Prince Andrew and Boris. "You know I should beery glad to do all in my power both for you and for this dear youngan." Again he pressed the hand of the latter with an expression ofood-natured, sincere, and animated levity. "But you see... anotherime!"
	Boris was excited by the thought of being so close to the higherowers as he felt himself to be at that moment. He was conscioushat here he was in contact with the springs that set in motion thenormous movements of the mass of which in his regiment he feltimself a tiny, obedient, and insignificant atom. They followed Princeolgorukov out into the corridor and met- coming out of the door ofhe Emperor's room by which Dolgorukov had entered- a short man inivilian clothes with a clever face and sharply projecting jawhich, without spoiling his face, gave him a peculiar vivacity andhiftiness of expression. This short man nodded to Dolgorukov as to anntimate friend and stared at Prince Andrew with cool intensity,alking straight toward him and evidently expecting him to bow or totep out of his way. Prince Andrew did neither: a look of animosityppeared on his face and the other turned away and went down theide of the corridor.
	"Who was that?" asked Boris.
	"He is one of the most remarkable, but to me most unpleasant of men-he Minister of Foreign Affairs, Prince Adam Czartoryski.... It isuch men as he who decide the fate of nations," added Bolkonski with aigh he could not suppress, as they passed out of the palace.
	Next day, the army began its campaign, and up to the very battlef Austerlitz, Boris was unable to see either Prince Andrew orolgorukov again and remained for a while with the Ismaylov regiment.BK3|CH10
	CHAPTER X
	At dawn on the sixteenth of November, Denisov's squadron, in whichicholas Rostov served and which was in Prince Bagration's detachment,oved from the place where it had spent the night, advancing intoction as arranged, and after going behind other columns for about twohirds of a mile was stopped on the highroad. Rostov saw theossacks and then the first and second squadrons of hussars andnfantry battalions and artillery pass by and go forward and thenenerals Bagration and Dolgorukov ride past with their adjutants.ll the fear before action which he had experienced as previously, allhe inner struggle to conquer that fear, all his dreams ofistinguishing himself as a true hussar in this battle, had beenasted. Their squadron remained in reserve and Nicholas Rostov spenthat day in a dull and wretched mood. At nine in the morning, he heardiring in front and shouts of hurrah, and saw wounded being broughtack (there were not many of them), and at last he saw how a wholeetachment of French cavalry was brought in, convoyed by a sontnyaf Cossacks. Evidently the affair was over and, though not big, hadeen a successful engagement. The men and officers returning spokef a brilliant victory, of the occupation of the town of Wischau andhe capture of a whole French squadron. The day was bright and sunnyfter a sharp night frost, and the cheerful glitter of that autumn dayas in keeping with the news of victory which was conveyed, not onlyy the tales of those who had taken part in it, but also by the joyfulxpression on the faces of soldiers, officers, generals, anddjutants, as they passed Rostov going or coming. And Nicholas, whoad vainly suffered all the dread that precedes a battle and had spenthat happy day in inactivity, was all the more depressed.
	"Come here, Wostov. Let's dwink to dwown our gwief!" shoutedenisov, who had settled down by the roadside with a flask and someood.
	The officers gathered round Denisov's canteen, eating and talking.
	"There! They are bringing another!" cried one of the officers,ndicating a captive French dragoon who was being brought in on footy two Cossacks.
	One of them was leading by the bridle a fine large French horse head taken from the prisoner.
	"Sell us that horse!" Denisov called out to the Cossacks.
	"If you like, your honor!"
	The officers got up and stood round the Cossacks and their prisoner.he French dragoon was a young Alsatian who spoke French with a Germanccent. He was breathless with agitation, his face was red, and whene heard some French spoken he at once began speaking to the officers,ddressing first one, then another. He said he would not have beenaken, it was not his fault but the corporal's who had sent him toeize some horsecloths, though he had told him the Russians werehere. And at every word he added: "But don't hurt my little horse!"nd stroked the animal. It was plain that he did not quite grasp wheree was. Now he excused himself for having been taken prisoner and now,magining himself before his own officers, insisted on his soldierlyiscipline and zeal in the service. He brought with him into ourearguard all the freshness of atmosphere of the French army, whichas so alien to us.
	The Cossacks sold the horse for two gold pieces, and Rostov, beinghe richest of the officers now that he had received his money, boughtt.
	"But don't hurt my little horse!" said the Alsatian good-naturedlyo Rostov when the animal was handed over to the hussar.
	Rostov smilingly reassured the dragoon and gave him money.
	"Alley! Alley!" said the Cossack, touching the prisoner's arm toake him go on.
	"The Emperor! The Emperor!" was suddenly heard among the hussars.
	All began to run and bustle, and Rostov saw coming up the roadehind him several riders with white plumes in their hats. In a momentveryone was in his place, waiting.
	Rostov did not know or remember how he ran to his place and mounted.nstantly his regret at not having been in action and his dejectedood amid people of whom he was weary had gone, instantly everyhought of himself had vanished. He was filled with happiness at hisearness to the Emperor. He felt that this nearness by itself madep to him for the day he had lost. He was happy as a lover when theonged-for moment of meeting arrives. Not daring to look round andithout looking round, he was ecstatically conscious of hispproach. He felt it not only from the sound of the hoofs of thepproaching cavalcade, but because as he drew near everything grewrighter, more joyful, more significant, and more festive aroundim. Nearer and nearer to Rostov came that sun shedding beams ofild and majestic light around, and already he felt himselfnveloped in those beams, he heard his voice, that kindly, calm, andajestic voice that was yet so simple! And as if in accord withostov's feeling, there was a deathly stillness amid which was heardhe Emperor's voice.
	"The Pavlograd hussars?" he inquired.
	"The reserves, sire!" replied a voice, a very human one comparedo that which had said: "The Pavlograd hussars?"
	The Emperor drew level with Rostov and halted. Alexander's faceas even more beautiful than it had been three days before at theeview. It shone with such gaiety and youth, such innocent youth, thatt suggested the liveliness of a fourteen-year-old boy, and yet it washe face of the majestic Emperor. Casually, while surveying thequadron, the Emperor's eyes met Rostov's and rested on them for notore than two seconds. Whether or no the Emperor understood what wasoing on in Rostov's soul (it seemed to Rostov that he understoodverything), at any rate his light-blue eyes gazed for about twoeconds into Rostov's face. A gentle, mild light poured from them.hen all at once he raised his eyebrows, abruptly touched his horseith his left foot, and galloped on.
	The younger Emperor could not restrain his wish to be present at theattle and, in spite of the remonstrances of his courtiers, atwelve o'clock left the third column with which he had been andalloped toward the vanguard. Before he came up with the hussars,everal adjutants met him with news of the successful result of thection.
	This battle, which consisted in the capture of a French squadron,as represented as a brilliant victory over the French, and so themperor and the whole army, especially while the smoke hung over theattlefield, believed that the French had been defeated and wereetreating against their will. A few minutes after the Emperor hadassed, the Pavlograd division was ordered to advance. In Wischautself, a petty German town, Rostov saw the Emperor again. In thearket place, where there had been some rather heavy firing before themperor's arrival, lay several killed and wounded soldiers whomhere had not been time to move. The Emperor, surrounded by hisuite of officers and courtiers, was riding a bobtailed chestnut mare, different one from that which he had ridden at the review, andending to one side he gracefully held a gold lorgnette to his eyesnd looked at a soldier who lay prone, with blood on his uncoveredead. The wounded soldier was so dirty, coarse, and revolting that hisroximity to the Emperor shocked Rostov. Rostov saw how themperor's rather round shoulders shuddered as if a cold shiver had runown them, how his left foot began convulsively tapping the horse'side with the spur, and how the well-trained horse looked roundnconcerned and did not stir. An adjutant, dismounting, lifted theoldier under the arms to place him on a stretcher that had beenrought. The soldier groaned.
	"Gently, gently! Can't you do it more gently?" said the Emperorpparently suffering more than the dying soldier, and he rode away.
	Rostov saw tears filling the Emperor's eyes and heard him, as he wasiding away, say to Czartoryski: "What a terrible thing war is: what aerrible thing! Quelle terrible chose que la guerre!"
	The troops of the vanguard were stationed before Wischau, withinight of the enemy's lines, which all day long had yielded ground tos at the least firing. The Emperor's gratitude was announced to theanguard, rewards were promised, and the men received a doubleation of vodka. The campfires crackled and the soldiers' songsesounded even more merrily than on the previous night. Denisovelebrated his promotion to the rank of major, and Rostov, who hadlready drunk enough, at the end of the feast proposed the Emperor'sealth. "Not 'our Sovereign, the Emperor,' as they say at officialinners," said he, "but the health of our Sovereign, that good,nchanting, and great man! Let us drink to his health and to theertain defeat of the French!"
	"If we fought before," he said, "not letting the French pass, ast Schon Grabern, what shall we not do now when he is at the front? Weill all die for him gladly! Is it not so, gentlemen? Perhaps I am notaying it right, I have drunk a good deal- but that is how I feel, ando do you too! To the health of Alexander the First! Hurrah!"
	"Hurrah!" rang the enthusiastic voices of the officers.
	And the old cavalry captain, Kirsten, shouted enthusiastically ando less sincerely than the twenty-year-old Rostov.
	When the officers had emptied and smashed their glasses, Kirstenilled others and, in shirt sleeves and breeches, went glass in hando the soldiers' bonfires and with his long gray mustache, his whitehest showing under his open shirt, he stood in a majestic pose in theight of the campfire, waving his uplifted arm.
	"Lads! here's to our Sovereign, the Emperor, and victory over ournemies! Hurrah!" he exclaimed in his dashing, old, hussar's baritone.
	The hussars crowded round and responded heartily with loud shouts.
	Late that night, when all had separated, Denisov with his short handatted his favorite, Rostov, on the shoulder.
	"As there's no one to fall in love with on campaign, he's fallenn love with the Tsar," he said.
	"Denisov, don't make fun of it!" cried Rostov. "It is such aofty, beautiful feeling, such a..."
	"I believe it, I believe it, fwiend, and I share and appwove..."
	"No, you don't understand!"
	And Rostov got up and went wandering among the campfires, dreamingf what happiness it would be to die- not in saving the Emperor's lifehe did not even dare to dream of that), but simply to die beforeis eyes. He really was in love with the Tsar and the glory of theussian arms and the hope of future triumph. And he was not the onlyan to experience that feeling during those memorable days precedinghe battle of Austerlitz: nine tenths of the men in the Russian armyere then in love, though less ecstatically, with their Tsar and thelory of the Russian arms.BK3|CH11
	CHAPTER XI
	The next day the Emperor stopped at Wischau, and Villier, hishysician, was repeatedly summoned to see him. At headquarters andmong the troops near by the news spread that the Emperor wasnwell. He ate nothing and had slept badly that night, those aroundim reported. The cause of this indisposition was the strongmpression made on his sensitive mind by the sight of the killed andounded.
	At daybreak on the seventeenth, a French officer who had come with alag of truce, demanding an audience with the Russian Emperor, wasrought into Wischau from our outposts. This officer was Savary. Themperor had only just fallen asleep and so Savary had to wait. Atidday he was admitted to the Emperor, and an hour later he rode offith Prince Dolgorukov to the advanced post of the French army.
	It was rumored that Savary had been sent to propose to Alexander aeeting with Napoleon. To the joy and pride of the whole army, aersonal interview was refused, and instead of the Sovereign, Princeolgorukov, the victor at Wischau, was sent with Savary to negotiateith Napoleon if, contrary to expectations, these negotiations werectuated by a real desire for peace.
	Toward evening Dolgorukov came back, went straight to the Tsar,nd remained alone with him for a long time.
	On the eighteenth and nineteenth of November, the army advancedwo days' march and the enemy's outposts after a brief interchangef shots retreated. In the highest army circles from midday on theineteenth, a great, excitedly bustling activity began which lastedill the morning of the twentieth, when the memorable battle ofusterlitz was fought.
	Till midday on the nineteenth, the activity- the eager talk, runningo and fro, and dispatching of adjutants- was confined to themperor's headquarters. But on the afternoon of that day, thisctivity reached Kutiizov's headquarters and the staffs of theommanders of columns. By evening, the adjutants had spread it toll ends and parts of the army, and in the night from the nineteentho the twentieth, the whole eighty thousand allied troops rose fromheir bivouacs to the hum of voices, and the army swayed and startedn one enormous mass six miles long.
	The concentrated activity which had begun at the Emperor'seadquarters in the morning and had started the whole movement thatollowed was like the first movement of the main wheel of a largeower clock. One wheel slowly moved, another was set in motion, and third, and wheels began to revolve faster and faster, levers andogwheels to work, chimes to play, figures to pop out, and the handso advance with regular motion as a result of all that activity.
	Just as in the mechanism of a clock, so in the mechanism of theilitary machine, an impulse once given leads to the final result; andust as indifferently quiescent till the moment when motion isransmitted to them are the parts of the mechanism which the impulseas not yet reached. Wheels creak on their axles as the cogs engagene another and the revolving pulleys whirr with the rapidity of theirovement, but a neighboring wheel is as quiet and motionless as thought were prepared to remain so for a hundred years; but the momentomes when the lever catches it and obeying the impulse that wheelegins to creak and joins in the common motion the result and aim ofhich are beyond its ken.
	Just as in a clock, the result of the complicated motion ofnnumerable wheels and pulleys is merely a slow and regular movementf the hands which show the time, so the result of all the complicateduman activities of 160,000 Russians and French- all their passions,esires, remorse, humiliations, sufferings, outbursts of pride,ear, and enthusiasm- was only the loss of the battle of Austerlitz,he so-called battle of the three Emperors- that is to say, a slowovement of the hand on the dial of human history.
	Prince Andrew was on duty that day and in constant attendance on theommander in chief.
	At six in the evening, Kutuzov went to the Emperor's headquartersnd after staying but a short time with the Tsar went to see the grandarshal of the court, Count Tolstoy.
	Bolkonski took the opportunity to go in to get some details of theoming action from Dolgorukov. He felt that Kutuzov was upset andissatisfied about something and that at headquarters they wereissatisfied with him, and also that at the Emperor's headquartersveryone adopted toward him the tone of men who know somethingthers do not know: he therefore wished to speak to Dolgorukov.
	"Well, how d'you do, my dear fellow?" said Dolgorukov, who wasitting at tea with Bilibin. "The fete is for tomorrow. How is yourld fellow? Out of sorts?"
	"I won't say he is out of sorts, but I fancy he would like to beeard."
	"But they heard him at the council of war and will hear him whene talks sense, but to temporize and wait for something now whenonaparte fears nothing so much as a general battle is impossible."
	"Yes, you have seen him?" said Prince Andrew. "Well, what isonaparte like? How did he impress you?"
	"Yes, I saw him, and am convinced that he fears nothing so much as aeneral engagement," repeated Dolgorukov, evidently prizing thiseneral conclusion which he had arrived at from his interview withapoleon. "If he weren't afraid of a battle why did he ask for thatnterview? Why negotiate, and above all why retreat, when to retreats so contrary to his method of conducting war? Believe me, he isfraid, afraid of a general battle. His hour has come! Mark my words!"
	"But tell me, what is he like, eh?" said Prince Andrew again.
	"He is a man in a gray overcoat, very anxious that I should call himYour Majesty,' but who, to his chagrin, got no title from me!hat's the sort of man he is, and nothing more," replied Dolgorukov,ooking round at Bilibin with a smile.
	"Despite my great respect for old Kutuzov," he continued, "we shoulde a nice set of fellows if we were to wait about and so give him ahance to escape, or to trick us, now that we certainly have him inur hands! No, we mustn't forget Suvorov and his rule- not to putourself in a position to be attacked, but yourself to attack. Believee in war the energy of young men often shows the way better thanll the experience of old Cunctators."
	"But in what position are we going to attack him? I have been at theutposts today and it is impossible to say where his chief forcesre situated," said Prince Andrew.
	He wished to explain to Dolgorukov a plan of attack he had himselformed.
	"Oh, that is all the same," Dolgorukov said quickly, and gettingp he spread a map on the table. "All eventualities have beenoreseen. If he is standing before Brunn..."
	And Prince Dolgorukov rapidly but indistinctly explained Weyrother'slan of a flanking movement.
	Prince Andrew began to reply and to state his own plan, whichight have been as good as Weyrother's, but for the disadvantagehat Weyrother's had already been approved. As soon as Prince Andrewegan to demonstrate the defects of the latter and the merits of hiswn plan, Prince Dolgorukov ceased to listen to him and gazedbsent-mindedly not at the map, but at Prince Andrew's face.
	"There will be a council of war at Kutuzov's tonight, though; youan say all this there," remarked Dolgorukov.
	"I will do so," said Prince Andrew, moving away from the map.
	"Whatever are you bothering about, gentlemen?" said Bilibin, who,ill then, had listened with an amused smile to their conversation andow was evidently ready with a joke. "Whether tomorrow bringsictory or defeat, the glory of our Russian arms is secure. Exceptour Kutuzov, there is not a single Russian in command of a column!he commanders are: Herr General Wimpfen, le Comte de Langeron, lerince de Lichtenstein, le Prince, de Hohenlohe, and finallyrishprish, and so on like all those Polish names."
	"Be quiet, backbiter!" said Dolgorukov. "It is not true; there areow two Russians, Miloradovich, and Dokhturov, and there would be ahird, Count Arakcheev, if his nerves were not too weak."
	"However, I think General Kutuzov has come out," said Prince Andrew.I wish you good luck and success, gentlemen!" he added and went outfter shaking hands with Dolgorukov and Bilibin.
	On the way home, Prince Andrew could not refrain from askingutuzov, who was sitting silently beside him, what he thought ofomorrow's battle.
	Kutuzov looked sternly at his adjutant and, after a pause,eplied: "I think the battle will be lost, and so I told Count Tolstoynd asked him to tell the Emperor. What do you think he replied? 'But,y dear general, I am engaged with rice and cutlets, look afterilitary matters yourself!' Yes... That was the answer I got!"BK3|CH12
	CHAPTER XII
	Shortly after nine o'clock that evening, Weyrother drove with hislans to Kutuzov's quarters where the council of war was to be held.ll the commanders of columns were summoned to the commander inhief's and with the exception of Prince Bagration, who declined toome, were all there at the appointed time.
	Weyrother, who was in full control of the proposed battle, by hisagerness and briskness presented a marked contrast to theissatisfied and drowsy Kutuzov, who reluctantly played the part ofhairman and president of the council of war. Weyrother evidently feltimself to be at the head of a movement that had already becomenrestrainable. He was like a horse running downhill harnessed to aeavy cart. Whether he was pulling it or being pushed by it he did notnow, but rushed along at headlong speed with no time to consider whathis movement might lead to. Weyrother had been twice that eveningo the enemy's picket line to reconnoiter personally, and twice to themperors, Russian and Austrian, to report and explain, and to hiseadquarters where he had dictated the dispositions in German, andow, much exhausted, he arrived at Kutuzov's.
	He was evidently so busy that he even forgot to be polite to theommander in chief. He interrupted him, talked rapidly andndistinctly, without looking at the man he was addressing, and didot reply to questions put to him. He was bespattered with mud and had pitiful, weary, and distracted air, though at the same time he wasaughty and self-confident.
	Kutuzov was occupying a nobleman's castle of modest dimensionsear Ostralitz. In the large drawing room which had become theommander in chief's office were gathered Kutuzov himself,eyrother, and the members of the council of war. They were drinkingea, and only awaited Prince Bagration to begin the council. At lastagration's orderly came with the news that the prince could notttend. Prince Andrew came in to inform the commander in chief of thisnd, availing himself of permission previously given him by Kutuzov toe present at the council, he remained in the room.
	"Since Prince Bagration is not coming, we may begin," saideyrother, hurriedly rising from his seat and going up to the table onhich an enormous map of the environs of Brunn was spread out.
	Kutuzov, with his uniform unbuttoned so that his fat neck bulgedver his collar as if escaping, was sitting almost asleep in a lowhair, with his podgy old hands resting symmetrically on its arms.t the sound of Weyrother's voice, he opened his one eye with anffort.
	"Yes, yes, if you please! It is already late," said he, andodding his head he let it droop and again closed his eye.
	If at first the members of the council thought that Kutuzov wasretending to sleep, the sounds his nose emitted during the readinghat followed proved that the commander in chief at that moment wasbsorbed by a far more serious matter than a desire to show hisontempt for the dispositions or anything else- he was engaged inatisfying the irresistible human need for sleep. He really wassleep. Weyrother, with the gesture of a man too busy to lose aoment, glanced at Kutuzov and, having convinced himself that he wassleep, took up a paper and in a loud, monotonous voice began toead out the dispositions for the impending battle, under a headinghich he also read out:
	"Dispositions for an attack on the enemy position behind Kobelnitznd Sokolnitz, November 30, 1805."
	The dispositions were very complicated and difficult. They begans follows:
	"As the enemy's left wing rests on wooded hills and his rightxtends along Kobelnitz and Sokolnitz behind the ponds that are there,hile we, on the other hand, with our left wing by far outflank hisight, it is advantageous to attack the enemy's latter wing especiallyf we occupy the villages of Sokolnitz and Kobelnitz, whereby we canoth fall on his flank and pursue him over the plain betweenchlappanitz and the Thuerassa forest, avoiding the defiles ofchlappanitz and Bellowitz which cover the enemy's front. For thisbject it is necessary that... The first column marches... Theecond column marches... The third column marches..." and so on,ead Weyrother.
	The generals seemed to listen reluctantly to the difficultispositions. The tall, fair-haired General Buxhowden stood, leaningis back against the wall, his eyes fixed on a burning candle, andeemed not to listen or even to wish to be thought to listen.xactly opposite Weyrother, with his glistening wide-open eyes fixedpon him and his mustache twisted upwards, sat the ruddyiloradovich in a military pose, his elbows turned outwards, his handsn his knees, and his shoulders raised. He remained stubbornly silent,azing at Weyrother's face, and only turned away his eyes when theustrian chief of staff finished reading. Then Miloradovich lookedound significantly at the other generals. But one could not tell fromhat significant look whether he agreed or disagreed and was satisfiedr not with the arrangements. Next to Weyrother sat Count Langeronho, with a subtle smile that never left his typically southern Frenchace during the whole time of the reading, gazed at his delicateingers which rapidly twirled by its corners a gold snuffbox onhich was a portrait. In the middle of one of the longest sentences,e stopped the rotary motion of the snuffbox, raised his head, andith inimical politeness lurking in the corners of his thin lipsnterrupted Weyrother, wishing to say something. But the Austrianeneral, continuing to read, frowned angrily and jerked his elbows, asf to say: "You can tell me your views later, but now be so good as toook at the map and listen." Langeron lifted his eyes with anxpression of perplexity, turned round to Miloradovich as if seekingn explanation, but meeting the latter's impressive but meaninglessaze drooped his eyes sadly and again took to twirling his snuffbox.
	"A geography lesson!" he muttered as if to himself, but loudnough to be heard.
	Przebyszewski, with respectful but dignified politeness, held hisand to his ear toward Weyrother, with the air of a man absorbed inttention. Dohkturov, a little man, sat opposite Weyrother, with anssiduous and modest mien, and stooping over the outspread maponscientiously studied the dispositions and the unfamiliarocality. He asked Weyrother several times to repeat words he hadot clearly heard and the difficult names of villages. Weyrotheromplied and Dohkturov noted them down.
	When the reading which lasted more than an hour was over, Langerongain brought his snuffbox to rest and, without looking at Weyrotherr at anyone in particular, began to say how difficult it was to carryut such a plan in which the enemy's position was assumed to be known,hereas it was perhaps not known, since the enemy was in movement.angeron's objections were valid but it was obvious that their chiefim was to show General Weyrother- who had read his dispositionsith as much self-confidence as if he were addressing school children-hat he had to do, not with fools, but with men who could teach himomething in military matters.
	When the monotonous sound of Weyrother's voice ceased, Kutuzovpened his eye as a miller wakes up when the soporific drone of theill wheel is interrupted. He listened to what Langeron said, as ifemarking, "So you are still at that silly business!" quickly closedis eye again, and let his head sink still lower.
	Langeron, trying as virulently as possible to sting Weyrother'sanity as author of the military plan, argued that Bonaparte mightasily attack instead of being attacked, and so render the whole ofhis plan perfectly worthless. Weyrother met all objections with airm and contemptuous smile, evidently prepared beforehand to meet allbjections be they what they might.
	"If he could attack us, he would have done so today," said he.
	"So you think he is powerless?" said Langeron.
	"He has forty thousand men at most," replied Weyrother, with themile of a doctor to whom an old wife wishes to explain thereatment of a case.
	"In that case he is inviting his doom by awaiting our attack,"aid Langeron, with a subtly ironical smile, again glancing roundor support to Miloradovich who was near him.
	But Miloradovich was at that moment evidently thinking of anythingather than of what the generals were disputing about.
	"Ma foi!" said he, "tomorrow we shall see all that on theattlefield."
	Weyrother again gave that smile which seemed to say that to him itas strange and ridiculous to meet objections from Russian generalsnd to have to prove to them what he had not merely convincedimself of, but had also convinced the sovereign Emperors of.
	"The enemy has quenched his fires and a continual noise is heardrom his camp," said he. "What does that mean? Either he isetreating, which is the only thing we need fear, or he is changingis position." (He smiled ironically.) "But even if he also took up position in the Thuerassa, he merely saves us a great deal ofrouble and all our arrangements to the minutest detail remain theame."
	"How is that?..." began Prince Andrew, who had for long been waitingn opportunity to express his doubts.
	Kutuzov here woke up, coughed heavily, and looked round at theenerals.
	"Gentlemen, the dispositions for tomorrow- or rather for today,or it is past midnight- cannot now be altered," said he. "You haveeard them, and we shall all do our duty. But before a battle, theres nothing more important..." he paused, "than to have a good sleep."
	He moved as if to rise. The generals bowed and retired. It wasast midnight. Prince Andrew went out.
	The council of war, at which Prince Andrew had not been able toxpress his opinion as he had hoped to, left on him a vague and uneasympression. Whether Dolgorukov and Weyrother, or Kutuzov, Langeron,nd the others who did not approve of the plan of attack, wereight- he did not know. "But was it really not possible for Kutuzov totate his views plainly to the Emperor? Is it possible that on accountf court and personal considerations tens of thousands of lives, andy life, my life," he thought, "must be risked?"
	"Yes, it is very likely that I shall be killed tomorrow," hehought. And suddenly, at this thought of death, a whole series ofost distant, most intimate, memories rose in his imagination: heemembered his last parting from his father and his wife; heemembered the days when he first loved her. He thought of herregnancy and felt sorry for her and for himself, and in a nervouslymotional and softened mood he went out of the hut in which he wasilleted with Nesvitski and began to walk up and down before it.
	The night was foggy and through the fog the moonlight gleamedysteriously. "Yes, tomorrow, tomorrow!" he thought. "Tomorrowverything may be over for me! All these memories will be no more,one of them will have any meaning for me. Tomorrow perhaps, evenertainly, I have a presentiment that for the first time I shallave to show all I can do." And his fancy pictured the battle, itsoss, the concentration of fighting at one point, and the hesitationf all the commanders. And then that happy moment, that Toulon forhich he had so long waited, presents itself to him at last. He firmlynd clearly expresses his opinion to Kutuzov, to Weyrother, and to themperors. All are struck by the justness of his views, but no onendertakes to carry them out, so he takes a regiment, a division-tipulates that no one is to interfere with his arrangements- leadsis division to the decisive point, and gains the victory alone.But death and suffering?" suggested another voice. Prince Andrew,owever, did not answer that voice and went on dreaming of hisriumphs. The dispositions for the next battle are planned by himlone. Nominally he is only an adjutant on Kutuzov's staff, but heoes everything alone. The next battle is won by him alone. Kutuzov isemoved and he is appointed... "Well and then?" asked the other voice.If before that you are not ten times wounded, killed, or betrayed,ell... what then?..." "Well then," Prince Andrew answered himself, "Ion't know what will happen and don't want to know, and can't, butf I want this- want glory, want to be known to men, want to beoved by them, it is not my fault that I want it and want nothingut that and live only for that. Yes, for that alone! I shall neverell anyone, but, oh God! what am I to do if I love nothing but famend men's esteem? Death, wounds, the loss of family- I fear nothing.nd precious and dear as many persons are to me- father, sister, wife-hose dearest to me- yet dreadful and unnatural as it seems, I wouldive them all at once for a moment of glory, of triumph over men, ofove from men I don't know and never shall know, for the love of theseen here," he thought, as he listened to voices in Kutuzov'sourtyard. The voices were those of the orderlies who were packing up;ne voice, probably a coachman's, was teasing Kutuzov's old cookhom Prince Andrew knew, and who was called Tit. He was saying,Tit, I say, Tit!"
	"Well?" returned the old man.
	"Go, Tit, thresh a bit!" said the wag.
	"Oh, go to the devil!" called out a voice, drowned by the laughterf the orderlies and servants.
	"All the same, I love and value nothing but triumph over them all, Ialue this mystic power and glory that is floating here above me inhis mist!"BK3|CH13
	CHAPTER XIII
	That same night, Rostov was with a platoon on skirmishing duty inront of Bagration's detachment. His hussars were placed along theine in couples and he himself rode along the line trying to masterhe sleepiness that kept coming over him. An enormous space, withur army's campfires dimly glowing in the fog, could be seen behindim; in front of him was misty darkness. Rostov could see nothing,eer as he would into that foggy distance: now something gleamed gray,ow there was something black, now little lights seemed to glimmerhere the enemy ought to be, now he fancied it was only something inis own eyes. His eyes kept closing, and in his fancy appeared- nowhe Emperor, now Denisov, and now Moscow memories- and he againurriedly opened his eyes and saw close before him the head and earsf the horse he was riding, and sometimes, when he came within sixaces of them, the black figures of hussars, but in the distance wastill the same misty darkness. "Why not?... It might easily happen,"hought Rostov, "that the Emperor will meet me and give me an order ase would to any other officer; he'll say: 'Go and find out what'shere.' There are many stories of his getting to know an officer inust such a chance way and attaching him to himself! What if he gavee a place near him? Oh, how I would guard him, how I would tell himhe truth, how I would unmask his deceivers!" And in order toealize vividly his love devotion to the sovereign, Rostov pictured toimself an enemy or a deceitful German, whom he would not only killith pleasure but whom he would slap in the face before the Emperor.uddenly a distant shout aroused him. He started and opened his eyes.
	"Where am I? Oh yes, in the skirmishing line... pass andatchword- shaft, Olmutz. What a nuisance that our squadron will be ineserve tomorrow," he thought. "I'll ask leave to go to the front,his may be my only chance of seeing the Emperor. It won't be long nowefore I am off duty. I'll take another turn and when I get back'll go to the general and ask him." He readjusted himself in theaddle and touched up his horse to ride once more round his hussars.t seemed to him that it was getting lighter. To the left he saw aloping descent lit up, and facing it a black knoll that seemed asteep as a wall. On this knoll there was a white patch that Rostovould not at all make out: was it a glade in the wood lit up by theoon, or some unmelted snow, or some white houses? He even thoughtomething moved on that white spot. "I expect it's snow... thatpot... a spot- une tache," he thought. "There now... it's not aache... Natasha... sister, black eyes... Na... tasha... (Won't she beurprised when I tell her how I've seen the Emperor?) Natasha...ake my sabretache..."- "Keep to the right, your honor, there areushes here," came the voice of an hussar, past whom Rostov was ridingn the act of falling asleep. Rostov lifted his head that had sunklmost to his horse's mane and pulled up beside the hussar. He wasuccumbing to irresistible, youthful, childish drowsiness. "But whatas I thinking? I mustn't forget. How shall I speak to the Emperor?o, that's not it- that's tomorrow. Oh yes! Natasha... sabretache...aber them...Whom? The hussars... Ah, the hussars with mustaches.long the Tverskaya Street rode the hussar with mustaches... I thoughtbout him too, just opposite Guryev's house... Old Guryev.... Oh,ut Denisov's a fine fellow. But that's all nonsense. The chiefhing is that the Emperor is here. How he looked at me and wished toay something, but dared not.... No, it was I who dared not. Buthat's nonsense, the chief thing is not to forget the importanthing I was thinking of. Yes, Na-tasha, sabretache, oh, yes, yes!hat's right!" And his head once more sank to his horse's neck. All atnce it seemed to him that he was being fired at. "What? What?hat?... Cut them down! What?..." said Rostov, waking up. At theoment he opened his eyes his eyes he heard in front of him, where thenemy was, the long-drawn shouts of thousands of voices. His horse andhe horse of the hussar near him pricked their ears at these shouts.ver there, where the shouting came from, a fire flared up and wentut again, then another, and all along the French line on the hillires flared up and the shouting grew louder and louder. Rostovould hear the sound of French words but could not distinguish them.he din of many voices was too great; all he could hear was: "ahahah!"nd "rrrr!"
	"What's that? What do you make of it?" said Rostov to the hussareside him. "That must be the enemy's camp!"
	The hussar did not reply.
	"Why, don't you hear it?" Rostov asked again, after waiting for aeply.
	"Who can tell, your honor?" replied the hussar reluctantly.
	"From the direction, it must be the enemy," repeated Rostov.
	"It may be he or it may be nothing," muttered the hussar. "It'sark... Steady!" he cried to his fidgeting horse.
	Rostov's horse was also getting restive: it pawed the frozen ground,ricking its ears at the noise and looking at the lights. The shoutingrew still louder and merged into a general roar that only an armyf several thousand men could produce. The lights spread farther andarther, probably along the line of the French camp. Rostov noonger wanted to sleep. The gay triumphant shouting of the enemyrmy had a stimulating effect on him. "Vive l'Empereur! L'Empereur!"e now heard distinctly.
	"They can't be far off, probably just beyond the stream," he said tohe hussar beside him.
	The hussar only sighed without replying and coughed angrily. Theound of horse's hoofs approaching at a trot along the line of hussarsas heard, and out of the foggy darkness the figure of a sergeant ofussars suddenly appeared, looming huge as an elephant.
	"Your honor, the generals!" said the sergeant, riding up to Rostov.
	Rostov, still looking round toward the fires and the shouts, rodeith the sergeant to meet some mounted men who were riding along theine. One was on a white horse. Prince Bagration and Prince Dolgorukovith their adjutants had come to witness the curious phenomenon of theights and shouts in the enemy's camp. Rostov rode up to Bagration,eported to him, and then joined the adjutants listening to what theenerals were saying.
	"Believe me," said Prince Dolgorukov, addressing Bagration, "it isothing but a trick! He has retreated and ordered the rearguard toindle fires and make a noise to deceive us."
	"Hardly," said Bagration. "I saw them this evening on that knoll; ifhey had retreated they would have withdrawn from that too....fficer!" said Bagration to Rostov, "are the enemy's skirmishers stillhere?"
	"They were there this evening, but now I don't know, yourxcellency. Shall I go with some of my hussars to see?" repliedostov.
	Bagration stopped and, before replying, tried to see Rostov's facen the mist.
	"Well, go and see," he said, after a pause.
	"Yes, sir."
	Rostov spurred his horse, called to Sergeant Fedchenko and two otherussars, told them to follow him, and trotted downhill in theirection from which the shouting came. He felt both frightened andleased to be riding alone with three hussars into that mysterious andangerous misty distance where no one had been before him. Bagrationalled to him from the hill not to go beyond the stream, but Rostovretended not to hear him and did not stop but rode on and on,ontinually mistaking bushes for trees and gullies for men andontinually discovering his mistakes. Having descended the hill at arot, he no longer saw either our own or the enemy's fires, buteard the shouting of the French more loudly and distinctly. In thealley he saw before him something like a river, but when he reachedt he found it was a road. Having come out onto the road he reinedn his horse, hesitating whether to ride along it or cross it and ridever the black field up the hillside. To keep to the road whichleamed white in the mist would have been safer because it would beasier to see people coming along it. "Follow me!" said he, crossedhe road, and began riding up the hill at a gallop toward the pointhere the French pickets had been standing that evening.
	"Your honor, there he is!" cried one of the hussars behind him.nd before Rostov had time to make out what the black thing was thatad suddenly appeared in the fog, there was a flash, followed by aeport, and a bullet whizzing high up in the mist with a plaintiveound passed out of hearing. Another musket missed fire but flashed inhe pan. Rostov turned his horse and galloped back. Four moreeports followed at intervals, and the bullets passed somewhere in theog singing in different tones. Rostov reined in his horse, whosepirits had risen, like his own, at the firing, and went back at aootpace. "Well, some more! Some more!" a merry voice was saying inis soul. But no more shots came.
	Only when approaching Bagration did Rostov let his horse gallopgain, and with his hand at the salute rode up to the general.
	Dolgorukov was still insisting that the French had retreated and hadnly lit fires to deceive us.
	"What does that prove?" he was saying as Rostov rode up. "They mightetreat and leave the pickets."
	"It's plain that they have not all gone yet, Prince," saidagration. "Wait till tomorrow morning, we'll find out everythingomorrow."
	"The picket is still on the hill, your excellency, just where it wasn the evening," reported Rostov, stooping forward with his hand athe salute and unable to repress the smile of delight induced by hiside and especially by the sound of the bullets.
	"Very good, very good," said Bagration. "Thank you, officer."
	"Your excellency," said Rostov, "may I ask a favor?"
	"What is it?"
	"Tomorrow our squadron is to be in reserve. May I ask to be attachedo the first squadron?"
	"What's your name?"
	"Count Rostov."
	"Oh, very well, you may stay in attendance on me."
	"Count Ilya Rostov's son?" asked Dolgorukov.
	But Rostov did not reply.
	"Then I may reckon on it, your excellency?"
	"I will give the order."
	"Tomorrow very likely I may be sent with some message to themperor," thought Rostov.
	"Thank God!"
	The fires and shouting in the enemy's army were occasioned by theact that while Napoleon's proclamation was being read to the troopshe Emperor himself rode round his bivouacs. The soldiers, on seeingim, lit wisps of straw and ran after him, shouting, "Vive'Empereur!" Napoleon's proclamation was as follows:
	Soldiers! The Russian army is advancing against you to avenge theustrian army of Ulm. They are the same battalions you broke atollabrunn and have pursued ever since to this place. The positione occupy is a strong one, and while they are marching to go rounde on the right they will expose a flank to me. Soldiers! I willyself direct your battalions. I will keep out of fire if you withour habitual valor carry disorder and confusion into the enemy'sanks, but should victory be in doubt, even for a moment, you will seeour Emperor exposing himself to the first blows of the enemy, forhere must be no doubt of victory, especially on this day when what ist stake is the honor of the French infantry, so necessary to theonor of our nation.
	Do not break your ranks on the plea of removing the wounded! Letvery man be fully imbued with the thought that we must defeat theseirelings of England, inspired by such hatred of our nation! Thisictory will conclude our campaign and we can return to winteruarters, where fresh French troops who are being raised in Franceill join us, and the peace I shall conclude will be worthy of myeople, of you, and of myself.
	                                                  NAPOLEONBK3|CH14
	CHAPTER XIV
	At five in the morning it was still quite dark. The troops of theenter, the reserves, and Bagration's right flank had not yet moved,ut on the left flank the columns of infantry, cavalry, and artillery,hich were to be the first to descend the heights to attack the Frenchight flank and drive it into the Bohemian mountains according tolan, were already up and astir. The smoke of the campfires, intohich they were throwing everything superfluous, made the eyesmart. It was cold and dark. The officers were hurriedly drinkingea and breakfasting, the soldiers, munching biscuit and beating aattoo with their feet to warm themselves, gathering round the fireshrowing into the flames the remains of sheds, chairs, tables, wheels,ubs, and everything that they did not want or could not carry awayith them. Austrian column guides were moving in and out among theussian troops and served as heralds of the advance. As soon as anustrian officer showed himself near a commanding officer'suarters, the regiment began to move: the soldiers ran from the fires,hrust their pipes into their boots, their bags into the carts, gotheir muskets ready, and formed rank. The officers buttoned up theiroats, buckled on their swords and pouches, and moved along theanks shouting. The train drivers and orderlies harnessed and packedhe wagons and tied on the loads. The adjutants and battalion andegimental commanders mounted, crossed themselves, gave finalnstructions, orders, and commissions to the baggage men whoemained behind, and the monotonous tramp of thousands of feetesounded. The column moved forward without knowing where andnable, from the masses around them, the smoke and the increasing fog,o see either the place they were leaving or that to which they wereoing.
	A soldier on the march is hemmed in and borne along by hisegiment as much as a sailor is by his ship. However far he hasalked, whatever strange, unknown, and dangerous places he reaches,ust as a sailor is always surrounded by the same decks, masts, andigging of his ship, so the soldier always has around him the sameomrades, the same ranks, the same sergeant major Ivan Mitrich, theame company dog Jack, and the same commanders. The sailor rarelyares to know the latitude in which his ship is sailing, but on theay of battle- heaven knows how and whence- a stern note of whichll are conscious sounds in the moral atmosphere of an army,nnouncing the approach of something decisive and solemn, andwakening in the men an unusual curiosity. On the day of battle theoldiers excitedly try to get beyond the interests of theiregiment, they listen intently, look about, and eagerly ask concerninghat is going on around them.
	The fog had grown so dense that though it was growing light theyould not see ten paces ahead. Bushes looked like gigantic trees andevel ground like cliffs and slopes. Anywhere, on any side, oneight encounter an enemy invisible ten paces off. But the columnsdvanced for a long time, always in the same fog, descending andscending hills, avoiding gardens and enclosures, going over new andnknown ground, and nowhere encountering the enemy. On the contrary,he soldiers became aware that in front, behind, and on all sides,ther Russian columns were moving in the same direction. Every soldierelt glad to know that to the unknown place where he was going, manyore of our men were going too.
	"There now, the Kurskies have also gone past," was being said in theanks.
	"It's wonderful what a lot of our troops have gathered, lads! Lastight I looked at the campfires and there was no end of them. Aegular Moscow!"
	Though none of the column commanders rode up to the ranks oralked to the men (the commanders, as we saw at the council of war,ere out of humor and dissatisfied with the affair, and so did notxert themselves to cheer the men but merely carried out therders), yet the troops marched gaily, as they always do when goingnto action, especially to an attack. But when they had marched forbout an hour in the dense fog, the greater part of the men had toalt and an unpleasant consciousness of some dislocation and blunderpread through the ranks. How such a consciousness is communicateds very difficult to define, but it certainly is communicated veryurely, and flows rapidly, imperceptibly, and irrepressibly, asater does in a creek. Had the Russian army been alone without anyllies, it might perhaps have been a long time before thisonsciousness of mismanagement became a general conviction, but ast was, the disorder was readily and naturally attributed to thetupid Germans, and everyone was convinced that a dangerous muddle hadeen occasioned by the sausage eaters.
	"Why have we stopped? Is the way blocked? Or have we already come upgainst the French?"
	"No, one can't hear them. They'd be firing if we had."
	"They were in a hurry enough to start us, and now here we stand inhe middle of a field without rhyme or reason. It's all those damnedermans' muddling! What stupid devils!"
	"Yes, I'd send them on in front, but no fear, they're crowding upehind. And now here we stand hungry."
	"I say, shall we soon be clear? They say the cavalry are blockinghe way," said an officer.
	"Ah, those damned Germans! They don't know their own country!"aid another.
	"What division are you?" shouted an adjutant, riding up.
	"The Eighteenth."
	"Then why are you here? You should have gone on long ago, now youon't get there till evening."
	"What stupid orders! They don't themselves know what they areoing!" said the officer and rode off.
	Then a general rode past shouting something angrily, not in Russian.
	"Tafa-lafa! But what he's jabbering no one can make out," said aoldier, mimicking the general who had ridden away. "I'd shoot them,he scoundrels!"
	"We were ordered to be at the place before nine, but we haven'tot halfway. Fine orders!" was being repeated on different sides.
	And the feeling of energy with which the troops had started began tourn into vexation and anger at the stupid arrangements and at theermans.
	The cause of the confusion was that while the Austrian cavalry wasoving toward our left flank, the higher command found that our centeras too far separated from our right flank and the cavalry were allrdered to turn back to the right. Several thousand cavalry crossed inront of the infantry, who had to wait.
	At the front an altercation occurred between an Austrian guide and aussian general. The general shouted a demand that the cavalryhould be halted, the Austrian argued that not he, but the higherommand, was to blame. The troops meanwhile stood growing listless andispirited. After an hour's delay they at last moved on, descendinghe hill. The fog that was dispersing on the hill lay still moreensely below, where they were descending. In front in the fog ahot was heard and then another, at first irregularly at varyingntervals- trata... tat- and then more and more regularly and rapidly,nd the action at the Goldbach Stream began.
	Not expecting to come on the enemy down by the stream, and havingtumbled on him in the fog, hearing no encouraging word from theirommanders, and with a consciousness of being too late spreadinghrough the ranks, and above all being unable to see anything in frontr around them in the thick fog, the Russians exchanged shots with thenemy lazily and advanced and again halted, receiving no timely ordersrom the officers or adjutants who wandered about in the fog inhose unknown surroundings unable to find their own regiments. In thisay the action began for the first, second, and third columns, whichad gone down into the valley. The fourth column, with which Kutuzovas, stood on the Pratzen Heights.
	Below, where the fight was beginning, there was still thick fog;n the higher ground it was clearing, but nothing could be seen ofhat was going on in front. Whether all the enemy forces were, as weupposed, six miles away, or whether they were near by in that seaf mist, no one knew till after eight o'clock.
	It was nine o'clock in the morning. The fog lay unbroken like aea down below, but higher up at the village of Schlappanitz whereapoleon stood with his marshals around him, it was quite light. Aboveim was a clear blue sky, and the sun's vast orb quivered like auge hollow, crimson float on the surface of that milky sea of mist.he whole French army, and even Napoleon himself with his staff,ere not on the far side of the streams and hollows of Sokolnitz andchlappanitz beyond which we intended to take up our position andegin the action, but were on this side, so close to our own forceshat Napoleon with the naked eye could distinguish a mounted manrom one on foot. Napoleon, in the blue cloak which he had worn on histalian campaign, sat on his small gray Arab horse a little in frontf his marshals. He gazed silently at the hills which seemed to riseut of the sea of mist and on which the Russian troops were movingn the distance, and he listened to the sounds of firing in thealley. Not a single muscle of his face- which in those days was stillhin- moved. His gleaming eyes were fixed intently on one spot. Hisredictions were being justified. Part of the Russian force hadlready descended into the valley toward the ponds and lakes andart were leaving these Pratzen Heights which he intended to attacknd regarded as the key to the position. He saw over the mist thatn a hollow between two hills near the village of Pratzen, the Russianolumns, their bayonets glittering, were moving continuously in oneirection toward the valley and disappearing one after another intohe mist. From information he had received the evening before, fromhe sound of wheels and footsteps heard by the outposts during theight, by the disorderly movement of the Russian columns, and from allndications, he saw clearly that the allies believed him to be farway in front of them, and that the columns moving near Pratzenonstituted the center of the Russian army, and that that center waslready sufficiently weakened to be successfully attacked. But stille did not begin the engagement.
	Today was a great day for him- the anniversary of his coronation.efore dawn he had slept for a few hours, and refreshed, vigorous, andn good spirits, he mounted his horse and rode out into the field inhat happy mood in which everything seems possible and everythingucceeds. He sat motionless, looking at the heights visible abovehe mist, and his cold face wore that special look of confident,elf-complacent happiness that one sees on the face of a boy happilyn love. The marshals stood behind him not venturing to distract histtention. He looked now at the Pratzen Heights, now at the sunloating up out of the mist.
	When the sun had entirely emerged from the fog, and fields andist were aglow with dazzling light- as if he had only awaited this toegin the action- he drew the glove from his shapely white hand,ade a sign with it to the marshals, and ordered the action toegin. The marshals, accompanied by adjutants, galloped off inifferent directions, and a few minutes later the chief forces ofhe French army moved rapidly toward those Pratzen Heights whichere being more and more denuded by Russian troops moving down thealley to their left.BK3|CH15
	CHAPTER XV
	At eight o'clock Kutuzov rode to Pratzen at the head of the fourtholumn, Miloradovich's, the one that was to take the place ofrzebyszewski's and Langeron's columns which had already gone downnto the valley. He greeted the men of the foremost regiment andave them the order to march, thereby indicating that he intended toead that column himself. When he had reached the village of Pratzene halted. Prince Andrew was behind, among the immense numberorming the commander in chief's suite. He was in a state ofuppressed excitement and irritation, though controlledly calm as aan is at the approach of a long-awaited moment. He was firmlyonvinced that this was the day of his Toulon, or his bridge ofrcola. How it would come about he did not know, but he felt sure itould do so. The locality and the position of our troops were known toim as far as they could be known to anyone in our army. His owntrategic plan, which obviously could not now be carried out, wasorgotten. Now, entering into Weyrother's plan, Prince Andrewonsidered possible contingencies and formed new projects such asight call for his rapidity of perception and decision.
	To the left down below in the mist, the musketry fire of unseenorces could be heard. It was there Prince Andrew thought the fightould concentrate. "There we shall encounter difficulties, and there,"hought he, "I shall be sent with a brigade or division, and there,tandard in hand, I shall go forward and break whatever is in front ofe."
	He could not look calmly at the standards of the passing battalions.eeing them he kept thinking, "That may be the very standard withhich I shall lead the army."
	In the morning all that was left of the night mist on the heightsas a hoar frost now turning to dew, but in the valleys it still layike a milk-white sea. Nothing was visible in the valley to the leftnto which our troops had descended and from whence came the sounds ofiring. Above the heights was the dark clear sky, and to the right theast orb of the sun. In front, far off on the farther shore of thatea of mist, some wooded hills were discernible, and it was therehe enemy probably was, for something could be descried. On theight the Guards were entering the misty region with a sound ofoofs and wheels and now and then a gleam of bayonets; to the lefteyond the village similar masses of cavalry came up and disappearedn the sea of mist. In front and behind moved infantry. Theommander in chief was standing at the end of the village lettinghe troops pass by him. That morning Kutuzov seemed worn andrritable. The infantry passing before him came to a halt withoutny command being given, apparently obstructed by something in front.
	"Do order them to form into battalion columns and go round theillage!" he said angrily to a general who had ridden up. "Don't younderstand, your excellency, my dear sir, that you must not defilehrough narrow village streets when we are marching against thenemy?"
	"I intended to re-form them beyond the village, your excellency,"nswered the general.
	Kutuzov laughed bitterly.
	"You'll make a fine thing of it, deploying in sight of the enemy!ery fine!"
	"The enemy is still far away, your excellency. According to theispositions..."
	"The dispositions!" exclaimed Kutuzov bitterly. "Who told youhat?... Kindly do as you are ordered."
	"Yes, sir."
	"My dear fellow," Nesvitski whispered to Prince Andrew, "the old mans as surly as a dog."
	An Austrian officer in a white uniform with green plumes in hisat galloped up to Kutuzov and asked in the Emperor's name had theourth column advanced into action.
	Kutuzov turned round without answering and his eye happened toall upon Prince Andrew, who was beside him. Seeing him, Kutuzov'salevolent and caustic expression softened, as if admitting thathat was being done was not his adjutant's fault, and still notnswering the Austrian adjutant, he addressed Bolkonski.
	"Go, my dear fellow, and see whether the third division has passedhe village. Tell it to stop and await my orders."
	Hardly had Prince Andrew started than he stopped him.
	"And ask whether sharpshooters have been posted," he added. "Whatre they doing? What are they doing?" he murmured to himself, stillot replying to the Austrian.
	Prince Andrew galloped off to execute the order.
	Overtaking the battalions that continued to advance, he stoppedhe third division and convinced himself that there really were noharpshooters in front of our columns. The colonel at the head ofhe regiment was much surprised at the commander in chief's order tohrow out skirmishers. He had felt perfectly sure that there werether troops in front of him and that the enemy must be at least sixiles away. There was really nothing to be seen in front except aarren descent hidden by dense mist. Having given orders in theommander in chief's name to rectify this omission, Prince Andrewalloped back. Kutuzov still in the same place, his stout body restingeavily in the saddle with the lassitude of age, sat yawning wearilyith closed eyes. The troops were no longer moving, but stood with theutts of their muskets on the ground.
	"All right, all right!" he said to Prince Andrew, and turned to aeneral who, watch in hand, was saying it was time they started as allhe left-flank columns had already descended.
	"Plenty of time, your excellency," muttered Kutuzov in the midstf a yawn. "Plenty of time," he repeated.
	Just then at a distance behind Kutuzov was heard the sound ofegiments saluting, and this sound rapidly came nearer along the wholextended line of the advancing Russian columns. Evidently the personhey were greeting was riding quickly. When the soldiers of theegiment in front of which Kutuzov was standing began to shout, heode a little to one side and looked round with a frown. Along theoad from Pratzen galloped what looked like a squadron of horsemenn various uniforms. Two of them rode side by side in front, at fullallop. One in a black uniform with white plumes in his hat rode aobtailed chestnut horse, the other who was in a white uniform rode black one. These were the two Emperors followed by their suites.utuzov, affecting the manners of an old soldier at the front, gavehe command "Attention!" and rode up to the Emperors with a salute.is whole appearance and manner were suddenly transformed. He put onhe air of a subordinate who obeys without reasoning. With anffectation of respect which evidently struck Alexandernpleasantly, he rode up and saluted.
	This unpleasant impression merely flitted over the young and happyace of the Emperor like a cloud of haze across a clear sky andanished. After his illness he looked rather thinner that day thann the field of Olmutz where Bolkonski had seen him for the first timebroad, but there was still the same bewitching combination of majestynd mildness in his fine gray eyes, and on his delicate lips theame capacity for varying expression and the same prevalent appearancef goodhearted innocent youth.
	At the Olmutz review he had seemed more majestic; here he seemedrighter and more energetic. He was slightly flushed after gallopingwo miles, and reining in his horse he sighed restfully and lookedound at the faces of his suite, young and animated as his own.zartoryski, Novosiltsev, Prince Volkonsky, Strogonov, and the others,ll richly dressed gay young men on splendid, well-groomed, fresh,nly slightly heated horses, exchanging remarks and smiling, hadtopped behind the Emperor. The Emperor Francis, a rosy, long facedoung man, sat very erect on his handsome black horse, looking aboutim in a leisurely and preoccupied manner. He beckoned to one of hishite adjutants and asked some question- "Most likely he is askingt what o'clock they started," thought Prince Andrew, watching his oldcquaintance with a smile he could not repress as he recalled hiseception at Brunn. In the Emperors' suite were the picked youngrderly officers of the Guard and line regiments, Russian andustrian. Among them were grooms leading the Tsar's beautiful relayorses covered with embroidered cloths.
	As when a window is opened a whiff of fresh air from the fieldsnters a stuffy room, so a whiff of youthfulness, energy, andonfidence of success reached Kutuzov's cheerless staff with thealloping advent of all these brilliant young men.
	"Why aren't you beginning, Michael Ilarionovich?" said the Emperorlexander hurriedly to Kutuzov, glancing courteously at the sameime at the Emperor Francis.
	"I am waiting, Your Majesty," answered Kutuzov, bending forwardespectfully.
	The Emperor, frowning slightly, bent his ear forward as if he hadot quite heard.
	"Waiting, Your Majesty," repeated Kutuzov. (Prince Andrew noted thatutuzov's upper lip twitched unnaturally as he said the wordwaiting.") "Not all the columns have formed up yet, Your Majesty."
	The Tsar heard but obviously did not like the reply; he shrugged hisather round shoulders and glanced at Novosiltsev who was near him, asf complaining of Kutuzov.
	"You know, Michael Ilarionovich, we are not are not on thempress' Field where a parade does not begin till all the troops aressembled," said the Tsar with another glance at the Emperorrancis, as if inviting him if not to join in at least to listen tohat he was saying. But the Emperor Francis continued to look aboutim and did not listen.
	"That is just why I do not begin, sire," said Kutuzov in aesounding voice, apparently to preclude the possibility of noteing heard, and again something in his face twitched- "That is justhy I do not begin, sire, because we are not on parade and not onhe Empress' Field." said clearly and distinctly.
	In the Emperor's suite all exchanged rapid looks that expressedissatisfaction and reproach. "Old though he may be, he should not, heertainly should not, speak like that," their glances seemed to say.
	The Tsar looked intently and observantly into Kutuzov's eyeaiting to hear whether he would say anything more. But Kutuzov,ith respectfully bowed head, seemed also to be waiting. The silenceasted for about a minute.
	"However, if you command it, Your Majesty," said Kutuzov, liftingis head and again assuming his former tone of a dull, unreasoning,ut submissive general.
	He touched his horse and having called Miloradovich, the commanderf the column, gave him the order to advance.
	The troops again began to move, and two battalions of the Novgorodnd one of the Apsheron regiment went forward past the Emperor.
	As this Apsheron battalion marched by, the red-faced Miloradovich,ithout his greatcoat, with his Orders on his breast and an enormousuft of plumes in his cocked hat worn on one side with its cornersront and back, galloped strenuously forward, and with a dashingalute reined in his horse before the Emperor.
	"God be with you, general!" said the Emperor.
	"Ma foi, sire, nous ferons ce qui sera dans notre possibilite,ire,"* he answered gaily, raising nevertheless ironic smiles amonghe gentlemen of the Tsar's suite by his poor French.
	*"Indeed, Sire, we shall do everything it is possible to do, Sire."
	Miloradovich wheeled his horse sharply and stationed himself aittle behind the Emperor. The Apsheron men, excited by the Tsar'sresence, passed in step before the Emperors and their suites at aold, brisk pace.
	"Lads!" shouted Miloradovich in a loud, self-confident, and cheeryoice, obviously so elated by the sound of firing, by the prospectf battle, and by the sight of the gallant Apsherons, his comradesn Suvorov's time, now passing so gallantly before the Emperors,hat he forgot the sovereigns' presence. "Lads, it's not the firstillage you've had to take," cried he.
	"Glad to do our best!" shouted the soldiers.
	The Emperor's horse started at the sudden cry. This horse that hadarried the sovereign at reviews in Russia bore him also here on theield of Austerlitz, enduring the heedless blows of his left footnd pricking its ears at the sound of shots just as it had done on thempress' Field, not understanding the significance of the firing,or of the nearness of the Emperor Francis' black cob, nor of all thatas being said, thought, and felt that day by its rider.
	The Emperor turned with a smile to one of his followers and made aemark to him, pointing to the gallant Apsherons.BK3|CH16
	CHAPTER XVI
	Kutuzov accompanied by his adjutants rode at a walking pace behindhe carabineers.
	When he had gone less than half a mile in the rear of the columne stopped at a solitary, deserted house that had probably once beenn inn, where two roads parted. Both of them led downhill and troopsere marching along both.
	The fog had begun to clear and enemy troops were already dimlyisible about a mile and a half off on the opposite heights. Downelow, on the left, the firing became more distinct. Kutuzov hadtopped and was speaking to an Austrian general. Prince Andrew, whoas a little behind looking at them, turned to an adjutant to askim for a field glass.
	"Look, look!" said this adjutant, looking not at the troops in theistance, but down the hill before him. "It's the French!"
	The two generals and the adjutant took hold of the field glass,rying to snatch it from one another. The expression on all theiraces suddenly changed to one of horror. The French were supposed toe a mile and a half away, but had suddenly and unexpectedlyppeared just in front of us.
	"It's the enemy?... No!... Yes, see it is!... for certain.... Butow is that?" said different voices.
	With the naked eye Prince Andrew saw below them to the right, notore than five hundred paces from where Kutuzov was standing, aense French column coming up to meet the Apsherons.
	"Here it is! The decisive moment has arrived. My turn has come,"hought Prince Andrew, and striking his horse he rode up to Kutuzov.
	"The Apsherons must be stopped, your excellency," cried he. But athat very instant a cloud of smoke spread all round, firing waseard quite close at hand, and a voice of naive terror barely twoteps from Prince Andrew shouted, "Brothers! All's lost!" And athis as if at a command, everyone began to run.
	Confused and ever-increasing crowds were running back to whereive minutes before the troops had passed the Emperors. Not only wouldt have been difficult to stop that crowd, it was even impossibleot to be carried back with it oneself. Bolkonski only tried not toose touch with it, and looked around bewildered and unable to grasphat was happening in front of him. Nesvitski with an angry face,ed and unlike himself, was shouting to Kutuzov that if he did notide away at once he would certainly be taken prisoner. Kutuzovemained in the same place and without answering drew out aandkerchief. Blood was flowing from his cheek. Prince Andrew forcedis way to him.
	"You are wounded?" he asked, hardly able to master the tremblingf his lower jaw.
	"The wound is not here, it is there!" said Kutuzov, pressing theandkerchief to his wounded cheek and pointing to the fleeingoldiers. "Stop them!" he shouted, and at the same moment, probablyealizing that it was impossible to stop them, spurred his horse andode to the right.
	A fresh wave of the flying mob caught him and bore him back with it.
	The troops were running in such a dense mass that once surrounded byhem it was difficult to get out again. One was shouting, "Get on! Whyre you hindering us?" Another in the same place turned round andired in the air; a third was striking the horse Kutuzov himself rode.aving by a great effort got away to the left from that flood ofen, Kutuzov, with his suite diminished by more than half, rode toward sound of artillery fire near by. Having forced his way out of therowd of fugitives, Prince Andrew, trying to keep near Kutuzov, saw onhe slope of the hill amid the smoke a Russian battery that wastill firing and Frenchmen running toward it. Higher up stood someussian infantry, neither moving forward to protect the battery norackward with the fleeing crowd. A mounted general separated himselfrom the infantry and approached Kutuzov. Of Kutuzov's suite only fouremained. They were all pale and exchanged looks in silence.
	"Stop those wretches!" gasped Kutuzov to the regimental commander,ointing to the flying soldiers; but at that instant, as if tounish him for those words, bullets flew hissing across the regimentnd across Kutuzov's suite like a flock of little birds.
	The French had attacked the battery and, seeing Kutuzov, were firingt him. After this volley the regimental commander clutched at hiseg; several soldiers fell, and a second lieutenant who was holdinghe flag let it fall from his hands. It swayed and fell, but caught onhe muskets of the nearest soldiers. The soldiers started firingithout orders.
	"Oh! Oh! Oh!" groaned Kutuzov despairingly and looked around....Bolkonski!" he whispered, his voice trembling from a consciousness ofhe feebleness of age, "Bolkonski!" he whispered, pointing to theisordered battalion and at the enemy, "what's that?"
	But before he had finished speaking, Prince Andrew, feeling tears ofhame and anger choking him, had already leapt from his horse andun to the standard.
	"Forward, lads!" he shouted in a voice piercing as a child's.
	"Here it is!" thought he, seizing the staff of the standard andearing with pleasure the whistle of bullets evidently aimed at him.everal soldiers fell.
	"Hurrah!" shouted Prince Andrew, and, scarcely able to hold up theeavy standard, he ran forward with full confidence that the wholeattalion would follow him.
	And really he only ran a few steps alone. One soldier moved and thennother and soon the whole battalion ran forward shouting "Hurrah!"nd overtook him. A sergeant of the battalion ran up and took the flaghat was swaying from its weight in Prince Andrew's hands, but heas immediately killed. Prince Andrew again seized the standard and,ragging it by the staff, ran on with the battalion. In front he sawur artillerymen, some of whom were fighting, while others, havingbandoned their guns, were running toward him. He also saw Frenchnfantry soldiers who were seizing the artillery horses and turninghe guns round. Prince Andrew and the battalion were already withinwenty paces of the cannon. He heard the whistle of bullets aboveim unceasingly and to right and left of him soldiers continuallyroaned and dropped. But he did not look at them: he looked only athat was going on in front of him- at the battery. He now sawlearly the figure of a red-haired gunner with his shako knocked awry,ulling one end of a mop while a French soldier tugged at the other.e could distinctly see the distraught yet angry expression on theaces of these two men, who evidently did not realize what they wereoing.
	"What are they about?" thought Prince Andrew as he gazed at them.Why doesn't the red-haired gunner run away as he is unarmed? Whyoesn't the Frenchman stab him? He will not get away before therenchman remembers his bayonet and stabs him...."
	And really another French soldier, trailing his musket, ran up tohe struggling men, and the fate of the red-haired gunner, who hadriumphantly secured the mop and still did not realize what awaitedim, was about to be decided. But Prince Andrew did not see how itnded. It seemed to him as though one of the soldiers near him hit himn the head with the full swing of a bludgeon. It hurt a little, buthe worst of it was that the pain distracted him and prevented hiseeing what he had been looking at.
	"What's this? Am I falling? My legs are giving way," thought he, andell on his back. He opened his eyes, hoping to see how the strugglef the Frenchmen with the gunners ended, whether the red-haired gunnerad been killed or not and whether the cannon had been captured oraved. But he saw nothing. Above him there was now nothing but theky- the lofty sky, not clear yet still immeasurably lofty, withray clouds gliding slowly across it. "How quiet, peaceful, andolemn; not at all as I ran," thought Prince Andrew- "not as we ran,houting and fighting, not at all as the gunner and the Frenchman withrightened and angry faces struggled for the mop: how differently dohose clouds glide across that lofty infinite sky! How was it I didot see that lofty sky before? And how happy I am to have found itt last! Yes! All is vanity, all falsehood, except that infiniteky. There is nothing, nothing, but that. But even it does notxist, there is nothing but quiet and peace. Thank God!..."BK3|CH17
	CHAPTER XVII
	On our right flank commanded by Bagration, at nine o'clock theattle had not yet begun. Not wishing to agree to Dolgorukov'semand to commence the action, and wishing to avert responsibilityrom himself, Prince Bagration proposed to Dolgorukov to send tonquire of the commander in chief. Bagration knew that as the distanceetween the two flanks was more than six miles, even if theessenger were not killed (which he very likely would be), and foundhe commander in chief (which would be very difficult), he would note able to get back before evening.
	Bagration cast his large, expressionless, sleepy eyes round hisuite, and the boyish face Rostov, breathless with excitement andope, was the first to catch his eye. He sent him.
	"And if I should meet His Majesty before I meet the commander inhief, your excellency?" said Rostov, with his hand to his cap.
	"You can give the message to His Majesty," said Dolgorukov,urriedly interrupting Bagration.
	On being relieved from picket duty Rostov had managed to get a fewours' sleep before morning and felt cheerful, bold, and resolute,ith elasticity of movement, faith in his good fortune, andenerally in that state of mind which makes everything seemossible, pleasant, and easy.
	All his wishes were being fulfilled that morning: there was to be general engagement in which he was taking part, more than that, heas orderly to the bravest general, and still more, he was goingith a message to Kutuzov, perhaps even to the sovereign himself.he morning was bright, he had a good horse under him, and his heartas full of joy and happiness. On receiving the order he gave hisorse the rein and galloped along the line. At first he rode along theine of Bagration's troops, which had not yet advanced into action butere standing motionless; then he came to the region occupied byvarov's cavalry and here he noticed a stir and signs of preparationor battle; having passed Uvarov's cavalry he clearly heard theound of cannon and musketry ahead of him. The firing grew loudernd louder.
	In the fresh morning air were now heard, not two or three muskethots at irregular intervals as before, followed by one or twoannon shots, but a roll of volleys of musketry from the slopes of theill before Pratzen, interrupted by such frequent reports of cannonhat sometimes several of them were not separated from one another buterged into a general roar.
	He could see puffs of musketry smoke that seemed to chase onenother down the hillsides, and clouds of cannon smoke rolling,preading, and mingling with one another. He could also, by theleam of bayonets visible through the smoke, make out moving masses ofnfantry and narrow lines of artillery with green caissons.
	Rostov stopped his horse for a moment on a hillock to see what wasoing on, but strain his attention as he would he could not understandr make out anything of what was happening: there in the smoke menf some sort were moving about, in front and behind moved lines ofroops; but why, whither, and who they were, it was impossible to makeut. These sights and sounds had no depressing or intimidatingffect on him; on the contrary, they stimulated his energy andetermination.
	"Go on! Go on! Give it them!" he mentally exclaimed at these sounds,nd again proceeded to gallop along the line, penetrating farthernd farther into the region where the army was already in action.
	"How it will be there I don't know, but all will be well!" thoughtostov.
	After passing some Austrian troops he noticed that the next partf the line (the Guards) was already in action.
	"So much the better! I shall see it close," he thought.
	He was riding almost along the front line. A handful of men camealloping toward him. They were our Uhlans who with disordered ranksere returning from the attack. Rostov got out of their way,nvoluntarily noticed that one of them was bleeding, and galloped on.
	"That is no business of mine," he thought. He had not ridden manyundred yards after that before he saw to his left, across the wholeidth of the field, an enormous mass of cavalry in brilliant whiteniforms, mounted on black horses, trotting straight toward him andcross his path. Rostov put his horse to full gallop to get out of theay of these men, and he would have got clear had they continued athe same speed, but they kept increasing their pace, so that some ofhe horses were already galloping. Rostov heard the thud of theiroofs and the jingle of their weapons and saw their horses, theirigures, and even their faces, more and more distinctly. They were ourorse Guards, advancing to attack the French cavalry that was comingo meet them.
	The Horse Guards were galloping, but still holding in theirorses. Rostov could already see their faces and heard the command:Charge!" shouted by an officer who was urging his thoroughbred toull speed. Rostov, fearing to be crushed or swept into the attackn the French, galloped along the front as hard as his horse could go,ut still was not in time to avoid them.
	The last of the Horse Guards, a huge pockmarked fellow, frownedngrily on seeing Rostov before him, with whom he would inevitablyollide. This Guardsman would certainly have bowled Rostov and hisedouin over (Rostov felt himself quite tiny and weak compared tohese gigantic men and horses) had it not occurred to Rostov tolourish his whip before the eyes of the Guardsman's horse. Theeavy black horse, sixteen hands high, shied, throwing back itsars; but the pockmarked Guardsman drove his huge spurs iniolently, and the horse, flourishing its tail and extending its neck,alloped on yet faster. Hardly had the Horse Guards passed Rostovefore he heard them shout, "Hurrah!" and looking back saw thatheir foremost ranks were mixed up with some foreign cavalry withed epaulets, probably French. He could see nothing more, formmediately afterwards cannon began firing from somewhere and smokenveloped everything.
	At that moment, as the Horse Guards, having passed him,isappeared in the smoke, Rostov hesitated whether to gallop afterhem or to go where he was sent. This was the brilliant charge ofhe Horse Guards that amazed the French themselves. Rostov wasorrified to hear later that of all that mass of huge and handsomeen, of all those brilliant, rich youths, officers and cadets, who hadalloped past him on their thousand-ruble horses, only eighteen wereeft after the charge.
	"Why should I envy them? My chance is not lost, and maybe I shallee the Emperor immediately! " thought Rostov and galloped on.
	When he came level with the Foot Guards he noticed that about themnd around them cannon balls were flying, of which he was aware not souch because he heard their sound as because he saw uneasiness onhe soldiers' faces and unnatural warlike solemnity on those of thefficers.
	Passing behind one of the lines of a regiment of Foot Guards heeard a voice calling him by name.
	"Rostov!"
	"What?" he answered, not recognizing Boris.
	"I say, we've been in the front line! Our regiment attacked!" saidoris with the happy smile seen on the faces of young men who haveeen under fire for the first time.
	Rostov stopped.
	"Have you?" he said. "Well, how did it go?"
	"We drove them back!" said Boris with animation, growingalkative. "Can you imagine it?" and he began describing how theuards, having taken up their position and seeing troops beforehem, thought they were Austrians, and all at once discovered from theannon balls discharged by those troops that they were themselves inhe front line and had unexpectedly to go into action. Rostovithout hearing Boris to the end spurred his horse.
	"Where are you off to?" asked Boris.
	"With a message to His Majesty."
	"There he is!" said Boris, thinking Rostov had said "Hisighness," and pointing to the Grand Duke who with his highhoulders and frowning brows stood a hundred paces away from them inis helmet and Horse Guards' jacket, shouting something to a pale,hite uniformed Austrian officer.
	"But that's the Grand Duke, and I want the commander in chief or themperor," said Rostov, and was about to spur his horse.
	"Count! Count!" shouted Berg who ran up from the other side as eagers Boris. "Count! I am wounded in my right hand" (and he showed hisleeding hand with a handkerchief tied round it) "and I remained athe front. I held my sword in my left hand, Count. All our family- theon Bergs- have been knights!"
	He said something more, but Rostov did not wait to hear it andode away.
	Having passed the Guards and traversed an empty space, Rostov, tovoid again getting in front of the first line as he had done when theorse Guards charged, followed the line of reserves, going far roundhe place where the hottest musket fire and cannonade were heard.uddenly he heard musket fire quite close in front of him and behindur troops, where he could never have expected the enemy to be.
	"What can it be?" he thought. "The enemy in the rear of our army?mpossible!" And suddenly he was seized by a panic of fear for himselfnd for the issue of the whole battle. "But be that what it may," heeflected, "there is no riding round it now. I must look for theommander in chief here, and if all is lost it is for me to perishith the rest."
	The foreboding of evil that had suddenly come over Rostov was morend more confirmed the farther he rode into the region behind theillage of Pratzen, which was full of troops of all kinds.
	"What does it mean? What is it? Whom are they firing at? Who isiring?" Rostov kept asking as he came up to Russian and Austrianoldiers running in confused crowds across his path.
	"The devil knows! They've killed everybody! It's all up now!" he wasold in Russian, German, and Czech by the crowd of fugitives whonderstood what was happening as little as he did.
	"Kill the Germans!" shouted one.
	"May the devil take them- the traitors!"
	"Zum Henker diese Russen!"* muttered a German.
	*"Hang these Russians!"
	Several wounded men passed along the road, and words of abuse,creams, and groans mingled in a general hubbub, then the firingied down. Rostov learned later that Russian and Austrian soldiers hadeen firing at one another.
	"My God! What does it all mean?" thought he. "And here, where at anyoment the Emperor may see them.... But no, these must be only aandful of scoundrels. It will soon be over, it can't be that, itan't be! Only to get past them quicker, quicker!"
	The idea of defeat and flight could not enter Rostov's head.hough he saw French cannon and French troops on the Pratzen Heightsust where he had been ordered to look for the commander in chief,e could not, did not wish to, believe that.BK3|CH18
	CHAPTER XVIII
	Rostov had been ordered to look for Kutuzov and the Emperor near theillage of Pratzen. But neither they nor a single commanding officerere there, only disorganized crowds of troops of various kinds. Herged on his already weary horse to get quickly past these crowds, buthe farther he went the more disorganized they were. The highroad onhich he had come out was thronged with caleches, carriages of allorts, and Russian and Austrian soldiers of all arms, some wounded andome not. This whole mass droned and jostled in confusion under theismal influence of cannon balls flying from the French batteriestationed on the Pratzen Heights.
	"Where is the Emperor? Where is Kutuzov?" Rostov kept askingveryone he could stop, but got no answer from anyone.
	At last seizing a soldier by his collar he forced him to answer.
	"Eh, brother! They've all bolted long ago!" said the soldier,aughing for some reason and shaking himself free.
	Having left that soldier who was evidently drunk, Rostov stopped theorse of a batman or groom of some important personage and began touestion him. The man announced that the Tsar had been driven in aarriage at full speed about an hour before along that very road andhat he was dangerously wounded.
	"It can't be!" said Rostov. "It must have been someone else."
	"I saw him myself." replied the man with a self-confident smile oferision. "I ought to know the Emperor by now, after the times I'veeen him in Petersburg. I saw him just as I see you.... There he satn the carriage as pale as anything. How they made the four blackorses fly! Gracious me, they did rattle past! It's time I knew themperial horses and Ilya Ivanych. I don't think Ilya drives anyonexcept the Tsar!"
	Rostov let go of the horse and was about to ride on, when aounded officer passing by addressed him:
	"Who is it you want?" he asked. "The commander in chief? He wasilled by a cannon ball- struck in the breast before our regiment."
	"Not killed- wounded!" another officer corrected him.
	"Who? Kutuzov?" asked Rostov.
	"Not Kutuzov, but what's his name- well, never mind... there are notany left alive. Go that way, to that village, all the commandersre there," said the officer, pointing to the village of Hosjeradek,nd he walked on.
	Rostov rode on at a footpace not knowing why or to whom he was nowoing. The Emperor was wounded, the battle lost. It was impossibleo doubt it now. Rostov rode in the direction pointed out to him, inhich he saw turrets and a church. What need to hurry? What was he nowo say to the Tsar or to Kutuzov, even if they were alive andnwounded?
	"Take this road, your honor, that way you will be killed at once!" aoldier shouted to him. "They'd kill you there!"
	"Oh, what are you talking about?" said another. "Where is he too? That way is nearer."
	Rostov considered, and then went in the direction where they said heould be killed.
	"It's all the same now. If the Emperor is wounded, am I to try toave myself?" he thought. He rode on to the region where thereatest number of men had perished in fleeing from Pratzen. Therench had not yet occupied that region, and the Russians- theninjured and slightly wounded- had left it long ago. All about theield, like heaps of manure on well-kept plowland, lay from ten toifteen dead and wounded to each couple of acres. The wounded creptogether in twos and threes and one could hear their distressingcreams and groans, sometimes feigned- or so it seemed to Rostov. Heut his horse to a trot to avoid seeing all these suffering men, ande felt afraid- afraid not for his life, but for the courage he needednd which he knew would not stand the sight of these unfortunates.
	The French, who had ceased firing at this field strewn with dead andounded where there was no one left to fire at, on seeing andjutant riding over it trained a gun on him and fired severalhots. The sensation of those terrible whistling sounds and of theorpses around him merged in Rostov's mind into a single feeling oferror and pity for himself. He remembered his mother's last letter.What would she feel," thought he, "if she saw me here now on thisield with the cannon aimed at me?"
	In the village of Hosjeradek there were Russian troops retiring fromhe field of battle, who though still in some confusion were lessisordered. The French cannon did not reach there and the musketryire sounded far away. Here everyone clearly saw and said that theattle was lost. No one whom Rostov asked could tell him where themperor or Kutuzov was. Some said the report that the Emperor wasounded was correct, others that it was not, and explained the falseumor that had spread by the fact that the Emperor's carriage hadeally galloped from the field of battle with the pale and terrifiedber-Hofmarschal Count Tolstoy, who had ridden out to theattlefield with others in the Emperor's suite. One officer toldostov that he had seen someone from headquarters behind the villageo the left, and thither Rostov rode, not hoping to find anyone buterely to ease his conscience. When he had ridden about two milesnd had passed the last of the Russian troops, he saw, near aitchen garden with a ditch round it, two men on horseback facinghe ditch. One with a white plume in his hat seemed familiar toostov; the other on a beautiful chestnut horse (which Rostovancied he had seen before) rode up to the ditch, struck his horseith his spurs, and giving it the rein leaped lightly over. Only aittle earth crumbled from the bank under the horse's hind hoofs.urning the horse sharply, he again jumped the ditch, andeferentially addressed the horseman with the white plumes,vidently suggesting that he should do the same. The rider, whoseigure seemed familiar to Rostov and involuntarily riveted histtention, made a gesture of refusal with his head and hand and byhat gesture Rostov instantly recognized his lamented and adoredonarch.
	"But it can't be he, alone in the midst of this empty field!"hought Rostov. At that moment Alexander turned his head and Rostovaw the beloved features that were so deeply engraved on his memory.he Emperor was pale, his cheeks sunken and his eyes hollow, but theharm, the mildness of his features, was all the greater. Rostov wasappy in the assurance that the rumors about the Emperor being woundedere false. He was happy to be seeing him. He knew that he might andven ought to go straight to him and give the message Dolgorukov hadrdered him to deliver.
	But as a youth in love trembles, is unnerved, and dares not utterhe thoughts he has dreamed of for nights, but looks around for helpr a chance of delay and flight when the longed-for moment comes ande is alone with her, so Rostov, now that he had attained what head longed for more than anything else in the world, did not knowow to approach the Emperor, and a thousand reasons occurred to himhy it would be inconvenient, unseemly, and impossible to do so.
	"What! It is as if I were glad of a chance to take advantage ofis being alone and despondent! A strange face may seem unpleasantr painful to him at this moment of sorrow; besides, what can I say toim now, when my heart fails me and my mouth feels dry at the mereight of him?" Not one of the innumerable speeches addressed to themperor that he had composed in his imagination could he now recall.hose speeches were intended for quite other conditions, they were forhe most part to be spoken at a moment of victory and triumph,enerally when he was dying of wounds and the sovereign had thankedim for heroic deeds, and while dying he expressed the love hisctions had proved.
	"Besides how can I ask the Emperor for his instructions for theight flank now that it is nearly four o'clock and the battle is lost?o, certainly I must not approach him, I must not intrude on hiseflections. Better die a thousand times than risk receiving an unkindook or bad opinion from him," Rostov decided; and sorrowfully andith a heart full despair he rode away, continually looking back athe Tsar, who still remained in the same attitude of indecision.
	While Rostov was thus arguing with himself and riding sadly away,aptain von Toll chanced to ride to the same spot, and seeing themperor at once rode up to him, offered his services, and assisted himo cross the ditch on foot. The Emperor, wishing to rest and feelingnwell, sat down under an apple tree and von Toll remained beside him.ostov from a distance saw with envy and remorse how von Toll spokeong and warmly to the Emperor and how the Emperor, evidently weeping,overed his eyes with his hand and pressed von Toll's hand.
	"And I might have been in his place!" thought Rostov, and hardlyestraining his tears of pity for the Emperor, he rode on in utterespair, not knowing where to or why he was now riding.
	His despair was all the greater from feeling that his own weaknessas the cause his grief.
	He might... not only might but should, have gone up to theovereign. It was a unique chance to show his devotion to themperor and he had not made use of it.... "What have I done?"hought he. And he turned round and galloped back to the place wheree had seen the Emperor, but there was no one beyond the ditch now.nly some carts and carriages were passing by. From one of the driverse learned that Kutuzov's staff were not far off, in the village theehicles were going to. Rostov followed them. In front of him walkedutuzov's groom leading horses in horsecloths. Then came a cart, andehind that walked an old, bandy-legged domestic serf in a peakedap and sheepskin coat.
	"Tit! I say, Tit!" said the groom.
	"What?" answered the old man absent-mindedly.
	"Go, Tit! Thresh a bit!"
	"Oh, you fool!" said the old man, spitting angrily. Some time passedn silence, and then the same joke was repeated.
	Before five in the evening the battle had been lost at all points.ore than a hundred cannon were already in the hands of the French.
	Przebyszewski and his corps had laid down their arms. Otherolumns after losing half their men were retreating in disorderlyonfused masses.
	The remains of Langeron's and Dokhturov's mingled forces wererowding around the dams and banks of the ponds near the village ofugesd.
	After five o'clock it was only at the Augesd Dam that a hotannonade (delivered by the French alone) was still to be heard fromumerous batteries ranged on the slopes of the Pratzen Heights,irected at our retreating forces.
	In the rearguard, Dokhturov and others rallying some battalions keptp a musketry fire at the French cavalry that was pursuing our troops.t was growing dusk. On the narrow Augesd Dam where for so manyears the old miller had been accustomed to sit in his tasseled capeacefully angling, while his grandson, with shirt sleeves rolledp, handled the floundering silvery fish in the watering can, onhat dam over which for so many years Moravians in shaggy caps andlue jackets had peacefully driven their two-horse carts loaded withheat and had returned dusty with flour whitening their carts- on thatarrow dam amid the wagons and the cannon, under the horses' hoofs andetween the wagon wheels, men disfigured by fear of death nowrowded together, crushing one another, dying, stepping over the dyingnd killing one another, only to move on a few steps and be killedhemselves in the same way.
	Every ten seconds a cannon ball flew compressing the air around,r a shell burst in the midst of that dense throng, killing some andplashing with blood those near them.
	Dolokhov- now an officer- wounded in the arm, and on foot, withhe regimental commander on horseback and some ten men of his company,epresented all that was left of that whole regiment. Impelled byhe crowd, they had got wedged in at the approach to the dam and,ammed in on all sides, had stopped because a horse in front hadallen under a cannon and the crowd were dragging it out. A cannonall killed someone behind them, another fell in front and splashedolokhov with blood. The crowd, pushing forward desperately,queezed together, moved a few steps, and again stopped.
	"Move on a hundred yards and we are certainly saved, remain herenother two minutes and it is certain death," thought each one.
	Dolokhov who was in the midst of the crowd forced his way to thedge of the dam, throwing two soldiers off their feet, and ran ontohe slippery ice that covered the millpool.
	"Turn this way!" he shouted, jumping over the ice which creakednder him; "turn this way!" he shouted to those with the gun. "Itears!..."
	The ice bore him but it swayed and creaked, and it was plain that itould give way not only under a cannon or a crowd, but very soonven under his weight alone. The men looked at him and pressed tohe bank, hesitating to step onto the ice. The general on horseback athe entrance to the dam raised his hand and opened his mouth toddress Dolokhov. Suddenly a cannon ball hissed so low above the crowdhat everyone ducked. It flopped into something moist, and the generalell from his horse in a pool of blood. Nobody gave him a look orhought of raising him.
	"Get onto the ice, over the ice! Go on! Turn! Don't you hear? Gon!" innumerable voices suddenly shouted after the ball had struck theeneral, the men themselves not knowing what, or why, they werehouting.
	One of the hindmost guns that was going onto the dam turned off ontohe ice. Crowds of soldiers from the dam began running onto the frozenond. The ice gave way under one of the foremost soldiers, and one leglipped into the water. He tried to right himself but fell in up tois waist. The nearest soldiers shrank back, the gun driver stoppedis horse, but from behind still came the shouts: "Onto the ice, whyo you stop? Go on! Go on!" And cries of horror were heard in therowd. The soldiers near the gun waved their arms and beat theorses to make them turn and move on. The horses moved off the bank.he ice, that had held under those on foot, collapsed in a great mass,nd some forty men who were on it dashed, some forward and someack, drowning one another.
	Still the cannon balls continued regularly to whistle and flopnto the ice and into the water and oftenest of all among the crowdhat covered the dam, the pond, and the bank.BK3|CH19
	CHAPTER XIX
	On the Pratzen Heights, where he had fallen with the flagstaff inis hand, lay Prince Andrew Bolkonski bleeding profusely andnconsciously uttering a gentle, piteous, and childlike moan.
	Toward evening he ceased moaning and became quite still. He didot know how long his unconsciousness lasted. Suddenly he again felthat he was alive and suffering from a burning, lacerating pain in hisead.
	"Where is it, that lofty sky that I did not know till now, but sawoday?" was his first thought. "And I did not know this sufferingither," he thought. "Yes, I did not know anything, anything at allill now. But where am I?"
	He listened and heard the sound of approaching horses, and voicespeaking French. He opened his eyes. Above him again was the sameofty sky with clouds that had risen and were floating still higher,nd between them gleamed blue infinity. He did not turn his head andid not see those who, judging by the sound of hoofs and voices, hadidden up and stopped near him.
	It was Napoleon accompanied by two aides-de-camp. Bonaparte ridingver the battlefield had given final orders to strengthen theatteries firing at the Augesd Dam and was looking at the killed andounded left on the field.
	"Fine men!" remarked Napoleon, looking at a dead Russianrenadier, who, with his face buried in the ground and a blackenedape, lay on his stomach with an already stiffened arm flung wide.
	"The ammunition for the guns in position is exhausted, Yourajesty," said an adjutant who had come from the batteries that wereiring at Augesd.
	"Have some brought from the reserve," said Napoleon, and having gonen a few steps he stopped before Prince Andrew, who lay on his backith the flagstaff that had been dropped beside him. (The flag hadlready been taken by the French as a trophy.)
	"That's a fine death!" said Napoleon as he gazed at Bolkonski.
	Prince Andrew understood that this was said of him and that it wasapoleon who said it. He heard the speaker addressed as Sire. But heeard the words as he might have heard the buzzing of a fly. Notnly did they not interest him, but he took no notice of them and atnce forgot them. His head was burning, he felt himself bleeding toeath, and he saw above him the remote, lofty, and everlasting sky. Henew it was Napoleon- his hero- but at that moment Napoleon seemedo him such a small, insignificant creature compared with what wasassing now between himself and that lofty infinite sky with thelouds flying over it. At that moment it meant nothing to him whoight be standing over him, or what was said of him; he was onlylad that people were standing near him and only wished that theyould help him and bring him back to life, which seemed to him soeautiful now that he had today learned to understand it soifferently. He collected all his strength, to stir and utter a sound.e feebly moved his leg and uttered a weak, sickly groan which arousedis own pity.
	"Ah! He is alive," said Napoleon. "Lift this young man up andarry him to the dressing station."
	Having said this, Napoleon rode on to meet Marshal Lannes, who,at in hand, rode up smiling to the Emperor to congratulate him on theictory.
	Prince Andrew remembered nothing more: he lost consciousness fromhe terrible pain of being lifted onto the stretcher, the joltinghile being moved, and the probing of his wound at the dressingtation. He did not regain consciousness till late in the day, whenith other wounded and captured Russian officers he was carried to theospital. During this transfer he felt a little stronger and wasble to look about him and even speak.
	The first words he heard on coming to his senses were those of arench convoy officer, who said rapidly: "We must halt here: themperor will pass here immediately; it will please him to see theseentlemen prisoners."
	"There are so many prisoners today, nearly the whole Russian army,hat he is probably tired of them," said another officer.
	"All the same! They say this one is the commander of all the Emperorlexander's Guards," said the first one, indicating a Russianfficer in the white uniform of the Horse Guards.
	Bolkonski recognized Prince Repnin whom he had met in Petersburgociety. Beside him stood a lad of nineteen, also a wounded officer ofhe Horse Guards.
	Bonaparte, having come up at a gallop, stopped his horse.
	"Which is the senior?" he asked, on seeing the prisoners.
	They named the colonel, Prince Repnin.
	"You are the commander of the Emperor Alexander's regiment oforse Guards?" asked Napoleon.
	"I commanded a squadron," replied Repnin.
	"Your regiment fulfilled its duty honorably," said Napoleon.
	"The praise of a great commander is a soldier's highest reward,"aid Repnin.
	"I bestow it with pleasure," said Napoleon. "And who is that youngan beside you?"
	Prince Repnin named Lieutenant Sukhtelen.
	After looking at him Napoleon smiled.
	"He's very young to come to meddle with us."
	"Youth is no hindrance to courage," muttered Sukhtelen in aailing voice.
	"A splendid reply!" said Napoleon. "Young man, you will go far!"
	Prince Andrew, who had also been brought forward before themperor's eyes to complete the show of prisoners, could not fail tottract his attention. Napoleon apparently remembered seeing him onhe battlefield and, addressing him, again used the epithet "youngan" that was connected in his memory with Prince Andrew.
	"Well, and you, young man," said he. "How do you feel, mon brave?"
	Though five minutes before, Prince Andrew had been able to say a fewords to the soldiers who were carrying him, now with his eyes fixedtraight on Napoleon, he was silent.... So insignificant at thatoment seemed to him all the interests that engrossed Napoleon, soean did his hero himself with his paltry vanity and joy in victoryppear, compared to the lofty, equitable, and kindly sky which head seen and understood, that he could not answer him.
	Everything seemed so futile and insignificant in comparison with thetern and solemn train of thought that weakness from loss of blood,uffering, and the nearness of death aroused in him. Looking intoapoleon's eyes Prince Andrew thought of the insignificance ofreatness, the unimportance of life which no one could understand, andhe still greater unimportance of death, the meaning of which no onelive could understand or explain.
	The Emperor without waiting for an answer turned away and said tone of the officers as he went: "Have these gentlemen attended tond taken to my bivouac; let my doctor, Larrey, examine theirounds. Au revoir, Prince Repnin!" and he spurred his horse andalloped away.
	His face shone with self-satisfaction and pleasure.
	The soldiers who had carried Prince Andrew had noticed and taken theittle gold icon Princess Mary had hung round her brother's neck,ut seeing the favor the Emperor showed the prisoners, they nowastened to return the holy image.
	Prince Andrew did not see how and by whom it was replaced, but theittle icon with its thin gold chain suddenly appeared upon hishest outside his uniform.
	"It would be good," thought Prince Andrew, glancing at the iconis sister had hung round his neck with such emotion and reverence,it would be good if everything were as clear and simple as it seemso Mary. How good it would be to know where to seek for help in thisife, and what to expect after it beyond the grave! How happy and calm should be if I could now say: 'Lord, have mercy on me!'... But tohom should I say that? Either to a Power indefinable,ncomprehensible, which I not only cannot address but which I cannotven express in words- the Great All or Nothing-" said he toimself, "or to that God who has been sewn into this amulet by Mary!here is nothing certain, nothing at all except the unimportance ofverything I understand, and the greatness of somethingncomprehensible but all-important.
	The stretchers moved on. At every jolt he again felt unendurableain; his feverishness increased and he grew delirious. Visions of hisather, wife, sister, and future son, and the tenderness he had felthe night before the battle, the figure of the insignificant littleapoleon, and above all this the lofty sky, formed the chiefubjects of his delirious fancies.
	The quiet home life and peaceful happiness of Bald Hills presentedtself to him. He was already enjoying that happiness when that littleapoleon had suddenly appeared with his unsympathizing look ofhortsighted delight at the misery of others, and doubts andorments had followed, and only the heavens promised peace. Towardorning all these dreams melted and merged into the chaos and darknessf unconciousness and oblivion which in the opinion of Napoleon'soctor, Larrey, was much more likely to end in death than inonvalescence.
	"He is a nervous, bilious subject," said Larrey, "and will notecover."
	And Prince Andrew, with others fatally wounded, was left to the caref the inhabitants of the district.BK4|CH1	                              BOOK FOUR: 1806
	CHAPTER I
	Early in the year 1806 Nicholas Rostov returned home on leave.enisov was going home to Voronezh and Rostov persuaded him toravel with him as far as Moscow and to stay with him there. Meeting aomrade at the last post station but one before Moscow, Denisov hadrunk three bottles of wine with him and, despite the jolting rutscross the snow-covered road, did not once wake up on the way tooscow, but lay at the bottom of the sleigh beside Rostov, who grewore and more impatient the nearer they got to Moscow.
	"How much longer? How much longer? Oh, these insufferable streets,hops, bakers' signboards, street lamps, and sleighs!" thought Rostov,hen their leave permits had been passed at the town gate and they hadntered Moscow.
	"Denisov! We're here! He's asleep," he added, leaning forward withis whole body as if in that position he hoped to hasten the speedf the sleigh.
	Denisov gave no answer.
	"There's the corner at the crossroads, where the cabman, Zakhar, hasis stand, and there's Zakhar himself and still the same horse! Andere's the little shop where we used to buy gingerbread! Can't youurry up? Now then!"
	"Which house is it?" asked the driver.
	"Why, that one, right at the end, the big one. Don't you see? That'sur house," said Rostov. "Of course, it's our house! Denisov, Denisov!e're almost there!"
	Denisov raised his head, coughed, and made no answer.
	"Dmitri," said Rostov to his valet on the box, "those lights aren our house, aren't they?"
	"Yes, sir, and there's a light in your father's study."
	"Then they've not gone to bed yet? What do you think? Mind now,on't forget to put out my new coat," added Rostov, fingering hisew mustache. "Now then, get on," he shouted to the driver. "Do wakep, Vaska!" he went on, turning to Denisov, whose head was againodding. "Come, get on! You shall have three rubles for vodka- getn!" Rostov shouted, when the sleigh was only three houses from hisoor. It seemed to him the horses were not moving at all. At lasthe sleigh bore to the right, drew up at an entrance, and Rostov sawverhead the old familiar cornice with a bit of plaster broken off,he porch, and the post by the side of the pavement. He sprang outefore the sleigh stopped, and ran into the hall. The house stood coldnd silent, as if quite regardless of who had come to it. There was none in the hall. "Oh God! Is everyone all right?" he thought, stoppingor a moment with a sinking heart, and then immediately starting toun along the hall and up the warped steps of the familiartaircase. The well-known old door handle, which always angered theountess when it was not properly cleaned, turned as loosely asver. A solitary tallow candle burned in the anteroom.
	Old Michael was asleep on the chest. Prokofy, the footman, who waso strong that he could lift the back of the carriage from behind, satlaiting slippers out of cloth selvedges. He looked up at thepening door and his expression of sleepy indifference suddenlyhanged to one of delighted amazement.
	"Gracious heavens! The young count!" he cried, recognizing his youngaster. "Can it be? My treasure!" and Prokofy, trembling withxcitement, rushed toward the drawing-room door, probably in ordero announce him, but, changing his mind, came back and stooped to kisshe young man's shoulder.
	"All well?" asked Rostov, drawing away his arm.
	"Yes, God be thanked! Yes! They've just finished supper. Let me have look at you, your excellency."
	"Is everything quite all right?"
	"The Lord be thanked, yes!"
	Rostov, who had completely forgotten Denisov, not wishing anyoneo forestall him, threw off his fur coat and ran on tiptoe through thearge dark ballroom. All was the same: there were the same old cardables and the same chandelier with a cover over it; but someone hadlready seen the young master, and, before he had reached therawing room, something flew out from a side door like a tornado andegan hugging and kissing him. Another and yet another creature of theame kind sprang from a second door and a third; more hugging, moreissing, more outcries, and tears of joy. He could not distinguishhich was Papa, which Natasha, and which Petya. Everyone shouted,alked, and kissed him at the same time. Only his mother was nothere, he noticed that.
	"And I did not know... Nicholas... My darling!..."
	"Here he is... our own... Kolya,* dear fellow... How he hashanged!... Where are the candles?... Tea!..."
	*Nicholas.
	"And me, kiss me!"
	"Dearest... and me!"
	Sonya, Natasha, Petya, Anna Mikhaylovna, Vera, and the old countere all hugging him, and the serfs, men and maids, flocked into theoom, exclaiming and oh-ing and ah-ing.
	Petya, clinging to his legs, kept shouting, "And me too!"
	Natasha, after she had pulled him down toward her and covered hisace with kisses, holding him tight by the skirt of his coat, sprangway and pranced up and down in one place like a goat and shriekediercingly.
	All around were loving eyes glistening with tears of joy, and allround were lips seeking a kiss.
	Sonya too, all rosy red, clung to his arm and, radiant with bliss,ooked eagerly toward his eyes, waiting for the look for which sheonged. Sonya now was sixteen and she was very pretty, especially athis moment of happy, rapturous excitement. She gazed at him, notaking her eyes off him, and smiling and holding her breath. He gaveer a grateful look, but was still expectant and looking foromeone. The old countess had not yet come. But now steps were heardt the door, steps so rapid that they could hardly be his mother's.
	Yet it was she, dressed in a new gown which he did not know, madeince he had left. All the others let him go, and he ran to her.hen they met, she fell on his breast, sobbing. She could not lift herace, but only pressed it to the cold braiding of his hussar's jacket.enisov, who had come into the room unnoticed by anyone, stood therend wiped his eyes at the sight.
	"Vasili Denisov, your son's friend," he said, introducing himself tohe count, who was looking inquiringly at him.
	"You are most welcome! I know, I know," said the count, kissingnd embracing Denisov. "Nicholas wrote us... Natasha, Vera, look! Heres Denisov!"
	The same happy, rapturous faces turned to the shaggy figure ofenisov.
	"Darling Denisov!" screamed Natasha, beside herself with rapture,pringing to him, putting her arms round him, and kissing him. Thisscapade made everybody feel confused. Denisov blushed too, but smilednd, taking Natasha's hand, kissed it.
	Denisov was shown to the room prepared for him, and the Rostovsll gathered round Nicholas in the sitting room.
	The old countess, not letting go of his hand and kissing it everyoment, sat beside him: the rest, crowding round him, watched everyovement, word, or look of his, never taking their blissfullydoring eyes off him. His brother and sisters struggled for the placesearest to him and disputed with one another who should bring himis tea, handkerchief, and pipe.
	Rostov was very happy in the love they showed him; but the firstoment of meeting had been so beatific that his present joy seemednsufficient, and he kept expecting something more, more and yet more.
	Next morning, after the fatigues of their journey, the travelerslept till ten o'clock.
	In the room next their bedroom there was a confusion of sabers,atchels, sabretaches, open portmanteaus, and dirty boots. Two freshlyleaned pairs with spurs had just been placed by the wall. Theervants were bringing in jugs and basins, hot water for shaving,nd their well-brushed clothes. There was a masculine odor and a smellf tobacco.
	"Hallo, Gwiska- my pipe!" came Vasili Denisov's husky voice.Wostov, get up!"
	Rostov, rubbing his eyes that seemed glued together, raised hisisheveled head from the hot pillow.
	"Why, is it late?"
	"Late! It's nearly ten o'clock," answered Natasha's voice. Austle of starched petticoats and the whispering and laughter ofirls' voices came from the adjoining room. The door was opened arack and there was a glimpse of something blue, of ribbons, blackair, and merry faces. It was Natasha, Sonya, and Petya, who hadome to see whether they were getting up.
	"Nicholas! Get up!" Natasha's voice was again heard at the door.
	"Directly!"
	Meanwhile, Petya, having found and seized the sabers in the outeroom, with the delight boys feel at the sight of a military elderrother, and forgetting that it was unbecoming for the girls to seeen undressed, opened the bedroom door.
	"Is this your saber?" he shouted.
	The girls sprang aside. Denisov hid his hairy legs under thelanket, looking with a scared face at his comrade for help. The door,aving let Petya in, closed again. A sound of laughter came fromehind it.
	"Nicholas! Come out in your dressing gown!" said Natasha's voice.
	"Is this your saber?" asked Petya. "Or is it yours?" he said,ddressing the black-mustached Denisov with servile deference.
	Rostov hurriedly put something on his feet, drew on his dressingown, and went out. Natasha had put on one spurred boot and was justetting her foot into the other. Sonya, when he came in, waswirling round and was about to expand her dresses into a balloonnd sit down. They were dressed alike, in new pale-blue frocks, andere both fresh, rosy, and bright. Sonya ran away, but Natasha, takinger brother's arm, led him into the sitting room, where they beganalking. They hardly gave one another time to ask questions and giveeplies concerning a thousand little matters which could notnterest anyone but themselves. Natasha laughed at every word heaid or that she said herself, not because what they were saying wasmusing, but because she felt happy and was unable to control heroy which expressed itself by laughter.
	"Oh, how nice, how splendid!" she said to everything.
	Rostov felt that, under the influence of the warm rays of love, thathildlike smile which had not once appeared on his face since heeft home now for the first time after eighteen months againrightened his soul and his face.
	"No, but listen," she said, "now you are quite a man, aren't you?'m awfully glad you're my brother." She touched his mustache. "I wanto know what you men are like. Are you the same as we? No?"
	"Why did Sonya run away?" asked Rostov.
	"Ah, yes! That's a whole long story! How are you going to speak toer- thou or you?"
	"As may happen," said Rostov.
	"No, call her you, please! I'll tell you all about it some otherime. No, I'll tell you now. You know Sonya's my dearest friend.uch a friend that I burned my arm for her sake. Look here!"
	She pulled up her muslin sleeve and showed him a red scar on herong, slender, delicate arm, high above the elbow on that part that isovered even by a ball dress.
	"I burned this to prove my love for her. I just heated a ruler inhe fire and pressed it there!"
	Sitting on the sofa with the little cushions on its arms, in whatsed to be his old schoolroom, and looking into Natasha's wildlyright eyes, Rostov re-entered that world of home and childhoodhich had no meaning for anyone else, but gave him some of the bestoys of his life; and the burning of an arm with a ruler as a proof ofove did not seem to him senseless, he understood and was noturprised at it.
	"Well, and is that all?" he asked.
	"We are such friends, such friends! All that ruler business was justonsense, but we are friends forever. She, if she loves anyone, doest for life, but I don't understand that, I forget quickly."
	"Well, what then?"
	"Well, she loves me and you like that."
	Natasha suddenly flushed.
	"Why, you remember before you went away?... Well, she says you areo forget all that.... She says: 'I shall love him always, but let hime free.' Isn't that lovely and noble! Yes, very noble? Isn't it?"sked Natasha, so seriously and excitedly that it was evident thathat she was now saying she had talked of before, with tears.
	Rostov became thoughtful.
	"I never go back on my word," he said. "Besides, Sonya is soharming that only a fool would renounce such happiness."
	"No, no!" cried Natasha, "she and I have already talked it over.e knew you'd say so. But it won't do, because you see, if you sayhat- if you consider yourself bound by your promise- it will seems if she had not meant it seriously. It makes it as if you werearrying her because you must, and that wouldn't do at all."
	Rostov saw that it had been well considered by them. Sonya hadlready struck him by her beauty on the preceding day. Today, whene had caught a glimpse of her, she seemed still more lovely. Sheas a charming girl of sixteen, evidently passionately in love withim (he did not doubt that for an instant). Why should he not love herow, and even marry her, Rostov thought, but just now there were soany other pleasures and interests before him! "Yes, they have taken aise decision," he thought, "I must remain free."
	"Well then, that's excellent," said he. "We'll talk it over latern. Oh, how glad I am to have you!
	"Well, and are you still true to Boris?" he continued.
	"Oh, what nonsense!" cried Natasha, laughing. "I don't think aboutim or anyone else, and I don't want anything of the kind."
	"Dear me! Then what are you up now?"
	"Now?" repeated Natasha, and a happy smile lit up her face. "Haveou seen Duport?"
	"No."
	"Not seen Duport- the famous dancer? Well then, you won'tnderstand. That's what I'm up to."
	Curving her arms, Natasha held out her skirts as dancers do, ranack a few steps, turned, cut a caper, brought her little feet sharplyogether, and made some steps on the very tips of her toes.
	"See, I'm standing! See!" she said, but could not maintain herselfn her toes any longer. "So that's what I'm up to! I'll never marrynyone, but will be a dancer. Only don't tell anyone."
	Rostov laughed so loud and merrily that Denisov, in his bedroom,elt envious and Natasha could not help joining in.
	"No, but don't you think it's nice?" she kept repeating.
	"Nice! And so you no longer wish to marry Boris?"
	Natasha flared up. "I don't want to marry anyone. And I'll tellim so when I see him!"
	"Dear me!" said Rostov.
	"But that's all rubbish," Natasha chattered on. "And is Denisovice?" she asked.
	"Yes, indeed!"
	"Oh, well then, good-by: go and dress. Is he very terrible,enisov?"
	"Why terrible?" asked Nicholas. "No, Vaska is a splendid fellow."
	"You call him Vaska? That's funny! And is he very nice?"
	"Very."
	"Well then, be quick. We'll all have breakfast together."
	And Natasha rose and went out of the room on tiptoe, like a balletancer, but smiling as only happy girls of fifteen can smile. Whenostov met Sonya in the drawing room, he reddened. He did not know howo behave with her. The evening before, in the first happy moment ofeeting, they had kissed each other, but today they felt it couldot be done; he felt that everybody, including his mother and sisters,as looking inquiringly at him and watching to see how he would behaveith her. He kissed her hand and addressed her not as thou but as you-onya. But their eyes met and said thou, and exchanged tenderisses. Her looks asked him to forgive her for having dared, byatasha's intermediacy, to remind him of his promise, and then thankedim for his love. His looks thanked her for offering him his freedomnd told her that one way or another he would never cease to love her,or that would be impossible.
	"How strange it is," said Vera, selecting a moment when all wereilent, "that Sonya and Nicholas now say you to one another and meetike strangers."
	Vera's remark was correct, as her remarks always were, but, likeost of her observations, it made everyone feel uncomfortable, notnly Sonya, Nicholas, and Natasha, but even the old countess, who-reading this love affair which might hinder Nicholas from making arilliant match- blushed like a girl.
	Denisov, to Rostov's surprise, appeared in the drawing room withomaded hair, perfumed, and in a new uniform, looking just as smart ase made himself when going into battle, and he was more amiable to theadies and gentlemen than Rostov had ever expected to see him.BK4|CH2
	CHAPTER II
	On his return to Moscow from the army, Nicholas Rostov waselcomed by his home circle as the best of sons, a hero, and theirarling Nikolenka; by his relations as a charming, attractive, andolite young man; by his acquaintances as a handsome lieutenant ofussars, a good dancer, and one of the best matches in the city.
	The Rostovs knew everybody in Moscow. The old count had money enoughhat year, as all his estates had been remortgaged, and so Nicholas,cquiring a trotter of his own, very stylish riding breeches of theatest cut, such as no one else yet had in Moscow, and boots of theatest fashion, with extremely pointed toes and small silver spurs,assed his time very gaily. After a short period of adapting himselfo the old conditions of life, Nicholas found it very pleasant to bet home again. He felt that he had grown up and matured very much. Hisespair at failing in a Scripture examination, his borrowing moneyrom Gavril to pay a sleigh driver, his kissing Sonya on the sly- heow recalled all this as childishness he had left immeasurably behind.ow he was a lieutenant of hussars, in a jacket laced with silver, andearing the Cross of St. George, awarded to soldiers for bravery inction, and in the company of well-known, elderly, and respectedacing men was training a trotter of his own for a race. He knew aady on one of the boulevards whom he visited of an evening. He ledhe mazurka at the Arkharovs' ball, talked about the war with Fieldarshal Kamenski, visited the English Club, and was on intimateerms with a colonel of forty to whom Denisov had introduced
	His passion for the Emperor had cooled somewhat in Moscow. Buttill, as he did not see him and had no opportunity of seeing him,e often spoke about him and about his love for him, letting it benderstood that he had not told all and that there was something inis feelings for the Emperor not everyone could understand, and withis whole soul he shared the adoration then common in Moscow for themperor, who was spoken of as the "angel incarnate."
	During Rostov's short stay in Moscow, before rejoining the army,e did not draw closer to Sonya, but rather drifted away from her. Sheas very pretty and sweet, and evidently deeply in love with him,ut he was at the period of youth when there seems so much to dohat there is no time for that sort of thing and a young man fearso bind himself and prizes his freedom which he needs for so manyther things. When he thought of Sonya, during this stay in Moscow, heaid to himself, "Ah, there will be, and there are, many more suchirls somewhere whom I do not yet know. There will be time enough tohink about love when I want to, but now I have no time." Besides,t seemed to him that the society of women was rather derogatory tois manhood. He went to balls and into ladies' society with anffectation of doing so against his will. The races, the English Club,prees with Denisov, and visits to a certain house- that was anotheratter and quite the thing for a dashing young hussar!
	At the beginning of March, old Count Ilya Rostov was very busyrranging a dinner in honor of Prince Bagration at the English Club.
	The count walked up and down the hall in his dressing gown, givingrders to the club steward and to the famous Feoktist, the Club's headook, about asparagus, fresh cucumbers, strawberries, veal, and fishor this dinner. The count had been a member and on the committee ofhe Club from the day it was founded. To him the Club entrusted therrangement of the festival in honor of Bagration, for few men knew soell how to arrange a feast on an open-handed, hospitable scale, andtill fewer men would be so well able and willing to make up out ofheir own resources what might be needed for the success of theete. The club cook and the steward listened to the count's ordersith pleased faces, for they knew that under no other management couldhey so easily extract a good profit for themselves from a dinnerosting several thousand rubles.
	"Well then, mind and have cocks' comb in the turtle soup, you know!"
	"Shall we have three cold dishes then?" asked the cook.
	The count considered.
	"We can't have less- yes, three... the mayonnaise, that's one," saide, bending down a finger.
	"Then am I to order those large sterlets?" asked the steward.
	"Yes, it can't be helped if they won't take less. Ah, dear me! I wasorgetting. We must have another entree. Ah, goodness gracious!" helutched at his head. "Who is going to get me the flowers? Dmitri! Eh,mitri! Gallop off to our Moscow estate," he said to the factotumho appeared at his call. "Hurry off and tell Maksim, the gardener, toet the serfs to work. Say that everything out of the hothouses muste brought here well wrapped up in felt. I must have two hundredots here on Friday."
	Having given several more orders, he was about to go to hislittle countess" to have a rest, but remembering something else ofmportance, he returned again, called back the cook and the clubteward, and again began giving orders. A light footstep and thelinking of spurs were heard at the door, and the young count,andsome, rosy, with a dark little mustache, evidently rested and madeleeker by his easy life in Moscow, entered the room.
	"Ah, my boy, my head's in a whirl!" said the old man with a smile,s if he felt a little confused before his son. "Now, if you wouldnly help a bit! I must have singers too. I shall have my ownrchestra, but shouldn't we get the gypsy singers as well? Youilitary men like that sort of thing."
	"Really, Papa, I believe Prince Bagration worried himself lessefore the battle of Schon Grabern than you do now," said his son with smile.
	The old count pretended to be angry.
	"Yes, you talk, but try it yourself!"
	And the count turned to the cook, who, with a shrewd andespectful expression, looked observantly and sympathetically at theather and son.
	"What have the young people come to nowadays, eh, Feoktist?" saide. "Laughing at us old fellows!"
	"That's so, your excellency, all they have to do is to eat a goodinner, but providing it and serving it all up, that's not theirusiness!
	"That's it, that's it!" exclaimed the count, and gaily seizing hison by both hands, he cried, "Now I've got you, so take the sleigh andair at once, and go to Bezukhob's, and tell him 'Count Ilya hasent you to ask for strawberries and fresh pineapples.' We can't gethem from anyone else. He's not there himself, so you'll have to go innd ask the princesses; and from there go on to the Rasgulyay- theoachman Ipatka knows- and look up the gypsy Ilyushka, the one whoanced at Count Orlov's, you remember, in a white Cossack coat, andring him along to me."
	"And am I to bring the gypsy girls along with him?" askedicholas, laughing. "Dear, dear!..."
	At that moment, with noiseless footsteps and with theusinesslike, preoccupied, yet meekly Christian look which nevereft her face, Anna Mikhaylovna entered the hall. Though she came uponhe count in his dressing gown every day, he invariably becameonfused and begged her to excuse his costume.
	"No matter at all, my dear count," she said, meekly closing heryes. "But I'll go to Bezukhov's myself. Pierre has arrived, and nowe shall get anything we want from his hothouses. I have to see him inny case. He has forwarded me a letter from Boris. Thank God, Boris isow on the staff."
	The count was delighted at Anna Mikhaylovna's taking upon herselfne of his commissions and ordered the small closed carriage for her.
	"Tell Bezukhov to come. I'll put his name down. Is his wife withim?" he asked.
	Anna Mikhaylovna turned up her eyes, and profound sadness wasepicted on her face.
	"Ah, my dear friend, he is very unfortunate," she said. "If whate hear is true, it is dreadful. How little we dreamed of such a thinghen we were rejoicing at his happiness! And such a lofty angelic souls young Bezukhov! Yes, I pity him from my heart, and shall try toive him what consolation I can."
	"Wh-what is the matter?" asked both the young and old Rostov.
	Anna Mikhaylovna sighed deeply.
	"Dolokhov, Mary Ivanovna's son," she said in a mysterious whisper,has compromised her completely, they say. Pierre took him up, invitedim to his house in Petersburg, and now... she has come here andhat daredevil after her!" said Anna Mikhaylovna, wishing to shower sympathy for Pierre, but by involuntary intonations and a halfmile betraying her sympathy for the "daredevil," as she calledolokhov. "They say Pierre is quite broken by his misfortune."
	"Dear, dear! But still tell him to come to the Club- it will alllow over. It will be a tremendous banquet."
	Next day, the third of March, soon after one o'clock, two hundrednd fifty members of the English Club and fifty guests were awaitinghe guest of honor and hero of the Austrian campaign, Princeagration, to dinner.
	On the first arrival of the news of the battle of Austerlitz, Moscowad been bewildered. At that time, the Russians were so used toictories that on receiving news of the defeat some would simply notelieve it, while others sought some extraordinary explanation of sotrange an event. In the English Club, where all who wereistinguished, important, and well informed forgathered when theews began to arrive in December, nothing was said about the war andhe last battle, as though all were in a conspiracy of silence. Theen who set the tone in conversation- Count Rostopchin, Prince Yuriolgorukov, Valuev, Count Markov, and Prince Vyazemski- did not showhemselves at the Club, but met in private houses in intimate circles,nd the Moscovites who took their opinions from others- Ilya Rostovmong them- remained for a while without any definite opinion on theubject of the war and without leaders. The Moscovites felt thatomething was wrong and that to discuss the bad news was difficult,nd so it was best to be silent. But after a while, just as a juryomes out of its room, the bigwigs who guided the Club's opinioneappeared, and everybody began speaking clearly and definitely.easons were found for the incredible, unheard-of, and impossiblevent of a Russian defeat, everything became clear, and in all cornersf Moscow the same things began to be said. These reasons were thereachery of the Austrians, a defective commissariat, the treachery ofhe Pole Przebyszewski and of the Frenchman Langeron, Kutuzov'sncapacity, and (it was whispered) the youth and inexperience of theovereign, who had trusted worthless and insignificant people. But thermy, the Russian army, everyone declared, was extraordinary and hadchieved miracles of valor.The soldiers, officers, and generals wereeroes. But the hero of heroes was Prince Bagration, distinguishedy his Schon Grabern affair and by the retreat from Austerlitz,here he alone had withdrawn his column unbroken and had all dayeaten back an enemy force twice as numerous as his own. What alsoonduced to Bagration's being selected as Moscow's hero was the facthat he had no connections in the city and was a stranger there. Inis person, honor was shown to a simple fighting Russian soldierithout connections and intrigues, and to one who was associated byemories of the Italian campaign with the name of Suvorov. Moreover,aying such honor to Bagration was the best way of expressingisapproval and dislike of Kutuzov.
	"Had there been no Bagration, it would have been necessary to inventim," said the wit Shinshin, parodying the words of Voltaire.utuzov no one spoke of, except some who abused him in whispers,alling him a court weathercock and an old satyr.
	All Moscow repeated Prince Dolgorukov's saying: "If you go onodeling and modeling you must get smeared with clay," suggestingonsolation for our defeat by the memory of former victories; andhe words of Rostopchin, that French soldiers have to be incited toattle by highfalutin words, and Germans by logical arguments tohow them that it is more dangerous to run away than to advance, buthat Russian soldiers only need to be restrained and held back! On allides, new and fresh anecdotes were heard of individual examples oferoism shown by our officers and men at Austerlitz. One had saved atandard, another had killed five Frenchmen, a third had loaded fiveannon singlehanded. Berg was mentioned, by those who did not knowim, as having, when wounded in the right hand, taken his sword in theeft, and gone forward. Of Bolkonski, nothing was said, and only thoseho knew him intimately regretted that he had died so young, leaving aregnant wife with his eccentric father.BK4|CH3
	CHAPTER III
	On that third of March, all the rooms in the English Club wereilled with a hum of conversation, like the hum of bees swarming inpringtime. The members and guests of the Club wandered hither andhither, sat, stood, met, and separated, some in uniform and some invening dress, and a few here and there with powdered hair and inussian kaftans. Powdered footmen, in livery with buckled shoes andmart stockings, stood at every door anxiously noting visitors'very movement in order to offer their services. Most of those presentere elderly, respected men with broad, self-confident faces, fatingers, and resolute gestures and voices. This class of guests andembers sat in certain habitual places and met in certain habitualroups. A minority of those present were casual guests- chieflyoung men, among whom were Denisov, Rostov, and Dolokhov- who wasow again an officer in the Semenov regiment. The faces of these youngeople, especially those who were militarymen, bore that expression ofondescending respect for their elders which seems to say to the oldereneration, "We are prepared to respect and honor you, but all theame remember that the future belongs to us."
	Nesvitski was there as an old member of the Club. Pierre, who at hisife's command had let his hair grow and abandoned his spectacles,ent about the rooms fashionably dressed but looking sad and dull.ere, as elsewhere, he was surrounded by an atmosphere of subservienceo his wealth, and being in the habit of lording it over these people,e treated them with absent-minded contempt.
	By his age he should have belonged to the younger men, but by hisealth and connections he belonged to the groups old and honoreduests, and so he went from one group to another. Some of the mostmportant old men were the center of groups which even strangerspproached respectfully to hear the voices of well-known men. Theargest circles formed round Count Rostopchin, Valuev, andaryshkin. Rostopchin was describing how the Russians had beenverwhelmed by flying Austrians and had had to force their way throughhem with bayonets.
	Valuev was confidentially telling that Uvarov had been sent frometersburg to ascertain what Moscow was thinking about Austerlitz.
	In the third circle, Naryshkin was speaking of the meeting of theustrian Council of War at which Suvorov crowed like a cock in replyo the nonsense talked by the Austrian generals. Shinshin, standinglose by, tried to make a joke, saying that Kutuzov had evidentlyailed to learn from Suvorov even so simple a thing as the art ofrowing like a cock, but the elder members glanced severely at theit, making him feel that in that place and on that day, it wasmproper to speak so of Kutuzov.
	Count Ilya Rostov, hurried and preoccupied, went about in his softoots between the dining and drawing rooms, hastily greeting themportant and unimportant, all of whom he knew, as if they were allquals, while his eyes occasionally sought out his fine well-set-upoung son, resting on him and winking joyfully at him. Young Rostovtood at a window with Dolokhov, whose acquaintance he had lately madend highly valued. The old count came up to them and pressedolokhov's hand.
	"Please come and visit us... you know my brave boy... beenogether out there... both playing the hero... Ah, Vasilignatovich... How d'ye do, old fellow?" he said, turning to an old manho was passing, but before he had finished his greeting there was aeneral stir, and a footman who had run in announced, with arightened face: "He's arrived!"
	Bells rang, the stewards rushed forward, and- like rye shakenogether in a shovel- the guests who had been scattered about inifferent rooms came together and crowded in the large drawing room byhe door of the ballroom.
	Bagration appeared in the doorway of the anteroom without hat orword, which, in accord with the Club custom, he had given up to theall porter. He had no lambskin cap on his head, nor had he a loadedhip over his shoulder, as when Rostov had seen him on the eve ofhe battle of Austerlitz, but wore a tight new uniform with Russiannd foreign Orders, and the Star of St. George on his left breast.vidently just before coming to the dinner he had had his hair andhiskers trimmed, which changed his appearance for the worse. Thereas something naively festive in his air, which, in conjunction withis firm and virile features, gave him a rather comical expression.ekleshev and Theodore Uvarov, who had arrived with him, paused at theoorway to allow him, as the guest of honor, to enter first. Bagrationas embarrassed, not wishing to avail himself of their courtesy, andhis caused some delay at the doors, but after all he did at lastnter first. He walked shyly and awkwardly over the parquet floor ofhe reception room, not knowing what to do with his hands; he was moreccustomed to walk over a plowed field under fire, as he had done athe head of the Kursk regiment at Schon Grabern- and he would haveound that easier. The committeemen met him at the first door and,xpressing their delight at seeing such a highly honored guest, tookossession of him as it were, without waiting for his reply,urrounded him, and led him to the drawing room. It was at firstmpossible to enter the drawing-room door for the crowd of members anduests jostling one another and trying to get a good look at Bagrationver each other's shoulders, as if he were some rare animal. Countlya Rostov, laughing and repeating the words, "Make way, dear boy!ake way, make way!" pushed through the crowd more energeticallyhan anyone, led the guests into the drawing room, and seated themn the center sofa. The bigwigs, the most respected members of thelub, beset the new arrivals. Count Ilya, again thrusting his wayhrough the crowd, went out of the drawing room and reappeared ainute later with another committeeman, carrying a large silver salverhich he presented to Prince Bagration. On the salver lay someerses composed and printed in the hero's honor. Bagration, oneeing the salver, glanced around in dismay, as though seeking help.ut all eyes demanded that he should submit. Feeling himself inheir power, he resolutely took the salver with both hands andooked sternly and reproachfully at the count who had presented ito him. Someone obligingly took the dish from Bagration (or heould, it seemed, have held it till evening and have gone in to dinnerith it) and drew his attention to the verses.
	"Well, I will read them, then!" Bagration seemed to say, and, fixingis weary eyes on the paper, began to read them with a fixed anderious expression. But the author himself took the verses and beganeading them aloud. Bagration bowed his bead and listened:
	   Bring glory then to Alexander's reign
	   And on the throne our Titus shield.
	   A dreaded foe be thou, kindhearted as a man,
	   A Rhipheus at home, a Caesar in the field!
	   E'en fortunate Napoleon
	   Knows by experience, now, Bagration,
	   And dare not Herculean Russians trouble...ut before he had finished reading, a stentorian major-domonnounced that dinner was ready! The door opened, and from theining room came the resounding strains of the polonaise:
	   Conquest's joyful thunder waken,
	   Triumph, valiant Russians, now!...nd Count Rostov, glancing angrily at the author who went on readingis verses, bowed to Bagration. Everyone rose, feeling that dinner wasore important than verses, and Bagration, again preceding all theest, went in to dinner. He was seated in the place of honor betweenwo Alexanders- Bekleshev and Naryshkin- which was a significantllusion to the name of the sovereign. Three hundred persons tookheir seats in the dining room, according to their rank andmportance: the more important nearer to the honored guest, asaturally as water flows deepest where the land lies lowest.
	Just before dinner, Count Ilya Rostov presented his son toagration, who recognized him and said a few words to him,isjointed and awkward, as were all the words he spoke that day, andount Ilya looked joyfully and proudly around while Bagration spoke tois son.
	Nicholas Rostov, with Denisov and his new acquaintance, Dolokhov,at almost at the middle of the table. Facing them sat Pierre,eside Prince Nesvitski. Count Ilya Rostov with the other members ofhe committee sat facing Bagration and, as the very personification ofoscow hospitality, did the honors to the prince.
	His efforts had not been in vain. The dinner, both the Lenten andhe other fare, was splendid, yet he could not feel quite at ease tillhe end of the meal. He winked at the butler, whispered directionso the footmen, and awaited each expected dish with some anxiety.verything was excellent. With the second course, a gigantic sterletat sight of which Ilya Rostov blushed with self-consciousleasure), the footmen began popping corks and filling the champagnelasses. After the fish, which made a certain sensation, the countxchanged glances with the other committeemen. "There will be manyoasts, it's time to begin," he whispered, and taking up his glass, heose. All were silent, waiting for what he would say.
	"To the health of our Sovereign, the Emperor!" he cried, and athe same moment his kindly eyes grew moist with tears of joy andnthusiasm. The band immediately struck up "Conquest's joyfulhunder waken..." All rose and cried "Hurrah!" Bagration also rose andhouted "Hurrah!" in exactly the same voice in which he had shouted itn the field at Schon Grabern. Young Rostov's ecstatic voice coulde heard above the three hundred others. He nearly wept. "To theealth of our Sovereign, the Emperor!" he roared, "Hurrah!" andmptying his glass at one gulp he dashed it to the floor. Manyollowed his example, and the loud shouting continued for a long time.hen the voices subsided, the footmen cleared away the broken glassnd everybody sat down again, smiling at the noise they had made andxchanging remarks. The old count rose once more, glanced at a noteying beside his plate, and proposed a toast, "To the health of theero of our last campaign, Prince Peter Ivanovich Bagration!" andgain his blue eyes grew moist. "Hurrah!" cried the three hundredoices again, but instead of the band a choir began singing aantata composed by Paul Ivanovich Kutuzov:
	   Russians! O'er all barriers on!
	   Courage conquest guarantees;
	   Have we not Bagration?
	   He brings foe men to their knees,... etc.
	As soon as the singing was over, another and another toast wasroposed and Count Ilya Rostov became more and more moved, morelass was smashed, and the shouting grew louder. They drank toekleshev, Naryshkin, Uvarov, Dolgorukov, Apraksin, Valuev, to theommittee, to all the Club members and to all the Club guests, andinally to Count Ilya Rostov separately, as the organizer of theanquet. At that toast, the count took out his handkerchief and,overing his face, wept outright.BK4|CH4
	CHAPTER IV
	Pierre sat opposite Dolokhov and Nicholas Rostov. As usual, he atend drank much, and eagerly. But those who knew him intimately noticedhat some great change had come over him that day. He was silent allhrough dinner and looked about, blinking and scowling, or, with fixedyes and a look of complete absent-mindedness, kept rubbing the bridgef his nose. His face was depressed and gloomy. He seemed to see andear nothing of what was going on around him and to be absorbed byome depressing and unsolved problem.
	The unsolved problem that tormented him was caused by hints given byhe princess, his cousin, at Moscow, concerning Dolokhov's intimacyith his wife, and by an anonymous letter he had received thatorning, which in the mean jocular way common to anonymous lettersaid that he saw badly through his spectacles, but that his wife'sonnection with Dolokhov was a secret to no one but himself. Pierrebsolutely disbelieved both the princess' hints and the letter, but heeared now to look at Dolokhov, who was sitting opposite him. Everyime he chanced to meet Dolokhov's handsome insolent eyes, Pierre feltomething terrible and monstrous rising in his soul and turned quicklyway. Involuntarily recalling his wife's past and her relations witholokhov, Pierre saw clearly that what was said in the letter might berue, or might at least seem to be true had it not referred to hisife. He involuntarily remembered how Dolokhov, who had fullyecovered his former position after the campaign, had returned toetersburg and come to him. Availing himself of his friendly relationsith Pierre as a boon companion, Dolokhov had come straight to hisouse, and Pierre had put him up and lent him money. Pierre recalledow Helene had smilingly expressed disapproval of Dolokhov's living atheir house, and how cynically Dolokhov had praised his wife'seauty to him and from that time till they came to Moscow had not lefthem for a day.
	"Yes, he is very handsome," thought Pierre, "and I know him. Itould be particularly pleasant to him to dishonor my name and ridiculee, just because I have exerted myself on his behalf, befriendedim, and helped him. I know and understand what a spice that would addo the pleasure of deceiving me, if it really were true. Yes, if itere true, but I do not believe it. I have no right to, and can't,elieve it." He remembered the expression Dolokhov's face assumed inis moments of cruelty, as when tying the policeman to the bear andropping them into the water, or when he challenged a man to a duelithout any reason, or shot a post-boy's horse with a pistol. Thatxpression was often on Dolokhov's face when looking at him. "Yes,e is a bully," thought Pierre, "to kill a man means nothing to him.t must seem to him that everyone is afraid of him, and that mustlease him. He must think that I, too, am afraid of him- and in fact Im afraid of him," he thought, and again he felt something terriblend monstrous rising in his soul. Dolokhov, Denisov, and Rostov wereow sitting opposite Pierre and seemed very gay. Rostov was talkingerrily to his two friends, one of whom was a dashing hussar and thether a notorious duelist and rake, and every now and then helanced ironically at Pierre, whose preoccupied, absent-minded, andassive figure was a very noticeable one at the dinner. Rostovooked inimically at Pierre, first because Pierre appeared to hisussar eyes as a rich civilian, the husband of a beauty, and in aord- an old woman; and secondly because Pierre in his preoccupationnd absent-mindedness had not recognized Rostov and had notesponded to his greeting. When the Emperor's health was drunk,ierre, lost in thought, did not rise or lift his glass.
	"What are you about?" shouted Rostov, looking at him in an ecstasyf exasperation. "Don't you hear it's His Majesty the Emperor'sealth?"
	Pierre sighed, rose submissively, emptied his glass, and, waitingill all were seated again, turned with his kindly smile to Rostov.
	"Why, I didn't recognize you!" he said. But Rostov was otherwisengaged; he was shouting "Hurrah!"
	"Why don't you renew the acquaintance?" said Dolokhov to Rostov.
	"Confound him, he's a fool!" said Rostov.
	"One should make up to the husbands of pretty women," said Denisov.
	Pierre did not catch what they were saying, but knew they werealking about him. He reddened and turned away.
	"Well, now to the health of handsome women!" said Dolokhov, and with serious expression, but with a smile lurking at the corners of hisouth, he turned with his glass to Pierre.
	"Here's to the health of lovely women, Peterkin- and theirovers!" he added.
	Pierre, with downcast eyes, drank out of his glass without lookingt Dolokhov or answering him. The footman, who was distributingeaflets with Kutuzov's cantata, laid one before Pierre as one ofhe principal guests. He was just going to take it when Dolokhov,eaning across, snatched it from his hand and began reading it. Pierreooked at Dolokhov and his eyes dropped, the something terrible andonstrous that had tormented him all dinnertime rose and tookossession of him. He leaned his whole massive body across the table.
	"How dare you take it?" he shouted.
	Hearing that cry and seeing to whom it was addressed, Nesvitskind the neighbor on his right quickly turned in alarm to Bezukhov.
	"Don't! Don't! What are you about?" whispered their frightenedoices.
	Dolokhov looked at Pierre with clear, mirthful, cruel eyes, and thatmile of his which seemed to say, "Ah! This is what I like!"
	"You shan't have it!" he said distinctly.
	Pale, with quivering lips, Pierre snatched the copy.
	"You...! you... scoundrel! I challenge you!" he ejaculated, and,ushing back his chair, he rose from the table.
	At the very instant he did this and uttered those words, Pierre felthat the question of his wife's guilt which had been tormenting himhe whole day was finally and indubitably answered in the affirmative.e hated her and was forever sundered from her. Despite Denisov'sequest that he would take no part in the matter, Rostov agreed toe Dolokhov's second, and after dinner he discussed the arrangementsor the duel with Nesvitski, Bezukhov's second. Pierre went home,ut Rostov with Dolokhov and Denisov stayed on at the Club tillate, listening to the gypsies and other singers.
	"Well then, till tomorrow at Sokolniki,"said Dolokhov, as he tookeave of Rostov in the Club porch.
	"And do you feel quite calm?" Rostov asked.
	Dolokhov paused.
	"Well, you see, I'll tell you the whole secret of dueling in twoords. If you are going to fight a duel, and you make a will and writeffectionate letters to your parents, and if you think you may beilled, you are a fool and are lost for certain. But go with theirm intention of killing your man as quickly and surely asossible, and then all will be right, as our bear huntsman at Kostromased to tell me. 'Everyone fears a bear,' he says, 'but when you seene your fear's all gone, and your only thought is not to let himet away!' And that's how it is with me. A demain, mon cher."*
	*Till tomorrow, my dear fellow.
	Next day, at eight in the morning, Pierre and Nesvitski drove to theokolniki forest and found Dolokhov, Denisov, and Rostov alreadyhere. Pierre had the air of a man preoccupied with considerationshich had no connection with the matter in hand. His haggard faceas yellow. He had evidently not slept that night. He looked aboutistractedly and screwed up his eyes as if dazzled by the sun. Heas entirely absorbed by two considerations: his wife's guilt, ofhich after his sleepless night he had not the slightest doubt, andhe guiltlessness of Dolokhov, who had no reason to preserve the honorf a man who was nothing to him.... "I should perhaps have done theame thing in his place," thought Pierre. "It's even certain that Ihould have done the same, then why this duel, this murder? Either Ihall kill him, or he will hit me in the head, or elbow, or knee.an't I go away from here, run away, bury myself somewhere?" passedhrough his mind. But just at moments when such thoughts occurred toim, he would ask in a particularly calm and absent-minded way,hich inspired the respect of the onlookers, "Will it be long? Arehings ready?"
	When all was ready, the sabers stuck in the snow to mark thearriers, and the pistols loaded, Nesvitski went up to Pierre.
	"I should not be doing my duty, Count," he said in timid tones, "andhould not justify your confidence and the honor you have done me inhoosing me for your second, if at this grave, this very grave, moment did not tell you the whole truth. I think there is no sufficientround for this affair, or for blood to be shed over it.... You wereot right, not quite in the right, you were impetuous..."
	"Oh yes, it is horribly stupid," said Pierre.
	"Then allow me to express your regrets, and I am sure yourpponent will accept them," said Nesvitski (who like the othersoncerned in the affair, and like everyone in similar cases, did notet believe that the affair had come to an actual duel). "You know,ount, it is much more honorable to admit one's mistake than to letatters become irreparable. There was no insult on either side.llow me to convey...."
	"No! What is there to talk about?" said Pierre. "It's all theame.... Is everything ready?" he added. "Only tell me where to go andhere to shoot," he said with an unnaturally gentle smile.
	He took the pistol in his hand and began asking about the working ofhe trigger, as he had not before held a pistol in his hand- a facthat he did not to confess.
	"Oh yes, like that, I know, I only forgot," said he.
	"No apologies, none whatever," said Dolokhov to Denisov (who onis side had been attempting a reconciliation), and he also went up tohe appointed place.
	The spot chosen for the duel was some eighty paces from the road,here the sleighs had been left, in a small clearing in the pineorest covered with melting snow, the frost having begun to break upuring the last few days. The antagonists stood forty paces apart athe farther edge of the clearing. The seconds, measuring the paces,eft tracks in the deep wet snow between the place where they had beentanding and Nesvitski's and Dolokhov's sabers, which were stuckntothe ground ten paces apart to mark the barrier. It was thawing andisty; at forty paces' distance nothing could be seen. For threeinutes all had been ready, but they still delayed and all wereilent.BK4|CH5
	CHAPTER V
	"Well begin!" said Dolokhov.
	"All right," said Pierre, still smiling in the same way. A feelingf dread was in the air. It was evident that the affair so lightlyegun could no longer be averted but was taking its coursendependently of men's will.
	Denisov first went to the barrier and announced: "As the adve'sawiesave wefused a weconciliation, please pwoceed. Take your pistols,nd at the word thwee begin to advance.
	"O-ne! T-wo! Thwee!" he shouted angrily and stepped aside.
	The combatants advanced along the trodden tracks, nearer andearer to one another, beginning to see one another through theist. They had the right to fire when they liked as they approachedhe barrier. Dolokhov walked slowly without raising his pistol,ooking intently with his bright, sparkling blue eyes into hisntagonist's face. His mouth wore its usual semblance of a smile.
	"So I can fire when I like!" said Pierre, and at the word "three,"e went quickly forward, missing the trodden path and stepping intohe deep snow. He held the pistol in his right hand at arm's length,pparently afraid of shooting himself with it. His left hand he heldarefully back, because he wished to support his right hand with itnd knew he must not do so. Having advanced six paces and strayedff the track into the snow, Pierre looked down at his feet, thenuickly glanced at Dolokhov and, bending his finger as he had beenhown, fired. Not at all expecting so loud a report, Pierrehuddered at the sound and then, smiling at his own sensations,tood still. The smoke, rendered denser by the mist, prevented himrom seeing anything for an instant, but there was no second report ase had expected. He only heard Dolokhov's hurried steps, and hisigure came in view through the smoke. He was pressing one hand to hiseft side, while the other clutched his drooping pistol. His faceas pale. Rostov ran toward him and said something.
	"No-o-o!" muttered Dolokhov through his teeth, "no, it's notver." And after stumbling a few staggering steps right up to theaber, he sank on the snow beside it. His left hand was bloody; heiped it on his coat and supported himself with it. His frowningace was pallid and quivered.
	"Plea..." began Dolokhov, but could not at first pronounce the word.
	"Please," he uttered with an effort.
	Pierre, hardly restraining his sobs, began running toward Dolokhovnd was about to cross the space between the barriers, when Dolokhovried:
	"To your barrier!" and Pierre, grasping what was meant, stopped byis saber. Only ten paces divided them. Dolokhov lowered his head tohe snow, greedily bit at it, again raised his head, adjusted himself,rew in his legs and sat up, seeking a firm center of gravity. Heucked and sucked and swallowed the cold snow, his lips quivered butis eyes, still smiling, glittered with effort and exasperation ase mustered his remaining strength. He raised his pistol and aimed.
	"Sideways! Cover yourself with your pistol!" ejaculated Nesvitski.
	"Cover yourself!" even Denisov cried to his adversary.
	Pierre, with a gentle smile of pity and remorse, his arms and legselplessly spread out, stood with his broad chest directly facingolokhov looked sorrowfully at him. Denisov, Rostov, and Nesvitskilosed their eyes. At the same instant they heard a report andolokhov's angry cry.
	"Missed!" shouted Dolokhov, and he lay helplessly, face downwards onhe snow.
	Pierre clutched his temples, and turning round went into the forest,rampling through the deep snow, and muttering incoherent words:
	"Folly... folly! Death... lies..." he repeated, puckering his face.
	Nesvitski stopped him and took him home.
	Rostov and Denisov drove away with the wounded Dolokhov.
	The latter lay silent in the sleigh with closed eyes and did notnswer a word to the questions addressed to him. But on enteringoscow he suddenly came to and, lifting his head with an effort,ook Rostov, who was sitting beside him, by the hand. Rostov wastruck by the totally altered and unexpectedly rapturous and tenderxpression on Dolokhov's face.
	"Well? How do you feel?" he asked.
	"Bad! But it's not that, my friend-" said Dolokhov with a gaspingoice. "Where are we? In Moscow, I know. I don't matter, but I haveilled her, killed... She won't get over it! She won't survive...."
	"Who?" asked Rostov.
	"My mother! My mother, my angel, my adored angel mother," andolokhov pressed Rostov's hand and burst into tears.
	When he had become a little quieter, he explained to Rostov thate was living with his mother, who, if she saw him dying, would noturvive it. He implored Rostov to go on and prepare her.
	Rostov went on ahead to do what was asked, and to his great surpriseearned that Dolokhov the brawler, Dolokhov the bully, lived in Moscowith an old mother and a hunchback sister, and was the mostffectionate of sons and brothers.BK4|CH6
	CHAPTER VI
	Pierre had of late rarely seen his wife alone. Both in Petersburgnd in Moscow their house was always full of visitors. The night afterhe duel he did not go to his bedroom but, as he often did, remainedn his father's room, that huge room in which Count Bezukhov had died.
	He lay down on the sofa meaning to fall asleep and forget all thatad happened to him, but could not do so. Such a storm of feelings,houghts, and memories suddenly arose within him that he could notall asleep, nor even remain in one place, but had to jump up and pacehe room with rapid steps. Now he seemed to see her in the earlyays of their marriage, with bare shoulders and a languid,assionate look on her face, and then immediately he saw beside herolokhov's handsome, insolent, hard, and mocking face as he had seent at the banquet, and then that same face pale, quivering, anduffering, as it had been when he reeled and sank on the snow.
	"What has happened?" he asked himself. "I have killed her lover,es, killed my wife's lover. Yes, that was it! And why? How did I comeo do it?"- "Because you married her," answered an inner voice.
	"But in what was I to blame?" he asked. "In marrying her withoutoving her; in deceiving yourself and her." And he vividly recalledhat moment after supper at Prince Vasili's, when he spoke those wordse had found so difficult to utter: "I love you." "It all comes fromhat! Even then I felt it," he thought. "I felt then that it was noto, that I had no right to do it. And so it turns out."
	He remembered his honeymoon and blushed at the recollection.articularly vivid, humiliating, and shameful was the recollectionf how one day soon after his marriage he came out of the bedroom intois study a little before noon in his silk dressing gown and found hisead steward there, who, bowing respectfully, looked into his face andt his dressing gown and smiled slightly, as if expressingespectful understanding of his employer's happiness.
	"But how often I have felt proud of her, proud of her majesticeauty and social tact," thought he; "been proud of my house, in whichhe received all Petersburg, proud of her unapproachability andeauty. So this is what I was proud of! I then thought that I didot understand her. How often when considering her character I haveold myself that I was to blame for not understanding her, for notnderstanding that constant composure and complacency and lack ofll interests or desires, and the whole secret lies in the terribleruth that she is a depraved woman. Now I have spoken that terribleord to myself all has become clear.
	"Anatole used to come to borrow money from her and used to kisser naked shoulders. She did not give him the money, but let herselfe kissed. Her father in jest tried to rouse her jealousy, and sheeplied with a calm smile that she was not so stupid as to be jealous:Let him do what he pleases,' she used to say of me. One day I askeder if she felt any symptoms of pregnancy. She laughedontemptuously and said she was not a fool to want to have children,nd that she was not going to have any children by me."
	Then he recalled the coarseness and bluntness of her thoughts andhe vulgarity of the expressions that were natural to her, thoughhe had been brought up in the most aristocratic circles.
	"I'm not such a fool.... Just you try it on.... Allez-vousromener,"* she used to say. Often seeing the success she had withoung and old men and women Pierre could not understand why he did notove her.
	*"You clear out of this."
	"Yes, I never loved her," said he to himself; "I knew she was aepraved woman," he repeated, "but dared not admit it to myself. Andow there's Dolokhov sitting in the snow with a forced smile anderhaps dying, while meeting my remorse with some forced bravado!"
	Pierre was one of those people who, in spite of an appearance ofhat is called weak character, do not seek a confidant in theirroubles. He digested his sufferings alone.
	"It is all, all her fault," he said to himself; "but what of that?hy did I bind myself to her? Why did I say 'Je vous aime'* to her,hich was a lie, and worse than a lie? I am guilty and mustndure... what? A slur on my name? A misfortune for life? Oh, that'sonsense," he thought. "The slur on my name and honor- that's allpart from myself.
	*I love you.
	"Louis XVI was executed because they said he was dishonorable and criminal," came into Pierre's head, "and from their point of viewhey were right, as were those too who canonized him and died aartyr's death for his sake. Then Robespierre was beheaded for being aespot. Who is right and who is wrong? No one! But if you are alive-ive: tomorrow you'll die as I might have died an hour ago. And ist worth tormenting oneself, when one has only a moment of life inomparison with eternity?"
	But at the moment when he imagined himself calmed by sucheflections, she suddenly came into his mind as she was at the momentshen he had most strongly expressed his insincere love for her, and heelt the blood rush to his heart and had again to get up and movebout and break and tear whatever came to his hand. "Why did I teller that 'Je vous aime'?" he kept repeating to himself. And when head said it for the tenth time, Molibre's words: "Mais que diablelloit-il faire dans cette galere?" occurred to him, and he began toaugh at himself.
	In the night he called his valet and told him to pack up to go toetersburg. He could not imagine how he could speak to her now. Heesolved to go away next day and leave a letter informing her of hisntention to part from her forever.
	Next morning when the valet came into the room with his coffee,ierre was lying asleep on the ottoman with an open book in his hand.
	He woke up and looked round for a while with a startledxpression, unable to realize where he was.
	"The countess told me to inquire whether your excellency was atome," said the valet.
	But before Pierre could decide what answer he would send, theountess herself in a white satin dressing gown embroidered withilver and with simply dressed hair (two immense plaits twice rounder lovely head like a coronet) entered the room, calm and majestic,xcept that there was a wrathful wrinkle on her rather prominentarble brow. With her imperturbable calm she did not begin to speak inront of the valet. She knew of the duel and had come to speak aboutt. She waited till the valet had set down the coffee things andeft the room. Pierre looked at her timidly over his spectacles, andike a hare surrounded by hounds who lays back her ears andontinues to crouch motionless before her enemies, he tried toontinue reading. But feeling this to be senseless and impossible,e again glanced timidly at her. She did not sit down but looked atim with a contemptuous smile, waiting for the valet to go.
	"Well, what's this now? What have you been up to now, I shouldike to know?" she asked sternly.
	"I? What have I...?" stammered Pierre.
	"So it seems you're a hero, eh? Come now, what was this duelbout? What is it meant to prove? What? I ask you."
	Pierre turned over heavily on the ottoman and opened his mouth,ut could not reply.
	"If you won't answer, I'll tell you..." Helene went on. "You believeverything you're told. You were told..." Helene laughed, "thatolokhov was my lover," she said in French with her coarse plainnessf speech, uttering the word amant as casually as any other word, "andou believed it! Well, what have you proved? What does this duelrove? That you're a fool, que vous etes un sot, but everybody knewhat. What will be the result? That I shall be the laughingstock ofll Moscow, that everyone will say that you, drunk and not knowinghat you were about, challenged a man you are jealous of withoutause." Helene raised her voice and became more and more excited, "Aan who's a better man than you in every way..."
	"Hm... Hm...!" growled Pierre, frowning without looking at her,nd not moving a muscle.
	"And how could you believe he was my lover? Why? Because I likeis company? If you were cleverer and more agreeable, I shouldrefer yours."
	"Don't speak to me... I beg you," muttered Pierre hoarsely.
	"Why shouldn't I speak? I can speak as I like, and I tell youlainly that there are not many wives with husbands such as you whoould not have taken lovers (des amants), but I have not done so,"aid she.
	Pierre wished to say something, looked at her with eyes whosetrange expression she did not understand, and lay down again. Heas suffering physically at that moment, there was a weight on hishest and he could not breathe. He knew that he must do something tout an end to this suffering, but what he wanted to do was tooerrible.
	"We had better separate," he muttered in a broken voice.
	"Separate? Very well, but only if you give me a fortune," saidelene. "Separate! That's a thing to frighten me with!"
	Pierre leaped up from the sofa and rushed staggering toward her.
	"I'll kill you!" he shouted, and seizing the marble top of a tableith a strength he had never before felt, he made a step toward herrandishing the slab.
	Helene's face became terrible, she shrieked and sprang aside. Hisather's nature showed itself in Pierre. He felt the fascination andelight of frenzy. He flung down the slab, broke it, and swooping downn her with outstretched hands shouted, "Get out!" in such aerrible voice that the whole house heard it with horror. God knowshat he would have done at that moment had Helene not fled from theoom.
	A week later Pierre gave his wife full power to control all hisstates in Great Russia, which formed the larger part of his property,nd left for Petersburg alone.BK4|CH7
	CHAPTER VII
	Two months had elapsed since the news of the battle of Austerlitznd the loss of Prince Andrew had reached Bald Hills, and in spitef the letters sent through the embassy and all the searches made, hisody had not been found nor was he on the list of prisoners. Whatas worst of all for his relations was the fact that there was still aossibility of his having been picked up on the battlefield by theeople of the place and that he might now be lying, recovering orying, alone among strangers and unable to send news of himself. Theazettes from which the old prince first heard of the defeat atusterlitz stated, as usual very briefly and vaguely, that afterrilliant engagements the Russians had had to retreat and had madeheir withdrawal in perfect order. The old prince understood from thisfficial report that our army had been defeated. A week after theazette report of the battle of Austerlitz came a letter fromutuzov informing the prince of the fate that had befallen his son.
	"Your son," wrote Kutuzov, "fell before my eyes, a standard in hisand and at the head of a regiment- he fell as a hero, worthy of hisather and his fatherland. To the great regret of myself and of thehole army it is still uncertain whether he is alive or not. I comfortyself and you with the hope that your son is alive, for otherwisee would have been mentioned among the officers found on the fieldf battle, a list of whom has been sent me under flag of truce."
	After receiving this news late in the evening, when he was alonen his study, the old prince went for his walk as usual nextorning, but he was silent with his steward, the gardener, and therchitect, and though he looked very grim he said nothing to anyone.
	When Princess Mary went to him at the usual hour he was working atis lathe and, as usual, did not look round at her.
	"Ah, Princess Mary!" he said suddenly in an unnatural voice,hrowing down his chisel. (The wheel continued to revolve by its ownmpetus, and Princess Mary long remembered the dying creak of thatheel, which merged in her memory with what followed.)
	She approached him, saw his face, and something gave way within her.er eyes grew dim. By the expression of her father's face, not sad,ot crushed, but angry and working unnaturally, she saw that hangingver her and about to crush her was some terrible misfortune, theorst in life, one she had not yet experienced, irreparable andncomprehensible- the death of one she loved.
	"Father! Andrew!"- said the ungraceful, awkward princess with suchn indescribable charm of sorrow and self-forgetfulness that herather could not bear her look but turned away with a sob.
	"Bad news! He's not among the prisoners nor among the killed!utuzov writes..." and he screamed as piercingly as if he wished torive the princess away by that scream... "Killed!"
	The princess did not fall down or faint. She was already pale, butn hearing these words her face changed and something brightened iner beautiful, radiant eyes. It was as if joy- a supreme joy apartrom the joys and sorrows of this world- overflowed the great griefithin her. She forgot all fear of her father, went up to him, tookis hand, and drawing him down put her arm round his thin, scraggyeck.
	"Father" she said, "do not turn away from me, let us weep together."
	"Scoundrels! Blackguards!" shrieked the old man, turning his faceway from her. "Destroying the army, destroying the men! And why?o, go and tell Lise."
	The princess sank helplessly into an armchair beside her fathernd wept. She saw her brother now as he had been at the moment when heook leave of her and of Lise, his look tender yet proud. She sawim tender and amused as he was when he put on the little icon. "Dide believe? Had he repented of his unbelief? Was he now there? Theren the realms of eternal peace and blessedness?" she thought.
	"Father, tell me how it happened," she asked through her tears.
	"Go! Go! Killed in battle, where the best of Russian men andussia's glory were led to destruction. Go, Princess Mary. Go and tellise. I will follow."
	When Princess Mary returned from her father, the little princess satorking and looked up with that curious expression of inner, happyalm peculiar to pregnant women. It was evident that her eyes didot see Princess Mary but were looking within... into herself... atomething joyful and mysterious taking place within her.
	"Mary," she said, moving away from the embroidery frame and lyingack, "give me your hand." She took her sister-in-law's hand andeld it below her waist.
	Her eyes were smiling expectantly, her downy lip rose and remainedifted in childlike happiness.
	Princess Mary knelt down before her and hid her face in the folds ofer sister-in-law's dress.
	"There, there! Do you feel it? I feel so strange. And do you know,ary, I am going to love him very much," said Lise, looking withright and happy eyes at her sister-in-law.
	Princess Mary could not lift her head, she was weeping.
	"What is the matter, Mary?"
	"Nothing... only I feel sad... sad about Andrew," she said, wipingway her tears on her sister-in-law's knee.
	Several times in the course of the morning Princess Mary beganrying to prepare her sister-in-law, and every time began to cry.nobservant as was the little princess, these tears, the cause ofhich she did not understand, agitated her. She said nothing butooked about uneasily as if in search of something. Before dinnerhe old prince, of whom she was always afraid, came into her room with peculiarly restless and malign expression and went out again withoutaying a word. She looked at Princess Mary, then sat thinking for ahile with that expression of attention to something within her thats only seen in pregnant women, and suddenly began to cry.
	"Has anything come from Andrew?" she asked.
	"No, you know it's too soon for news. But my father is anxious and Ieel afraid."
	"So there's nothing?"
	"Nothing," answered Princess Mary, looking firmly with her radiantyes at her sister-in-law.
	She had determined not to tell her and persuaded her father toide the terrible news from her till after her confinement, whichas expected within a few days. Princess Mary and the old princeach bore and hid their grief in their own way. The old prince wouldot cherish any hope: he made up his mind that Prince Andrew hadeen killed, and though he sent an official to Austria to seek forraces of his son, he ordered a monument from Moscow which he intendedo erect in his own garden to his memory, and he told everybody thatis son had been killed. He tried not to change his former way ofife, but his strength failed him. He walked less, ate less, sleptess, and became weaker every day. Princess Mary hoped. She prayed forer brother as living and was always awaiting news of his return.BK4|CH8
	CHAPTER VIII
	"Dearest," said the little princess after breakfast on the morningf the nineteenth March, and her downy little lip rose from old habit,ut as sorrow was manifest in every smile, the sound of every word,nd even every footstep in that house since the terrible news hadome, so now the smile of the little princess- influenced by theeneral mood though without knowing its cause- was such as to remindne still more of the general sorrow.
	"Dearest, I'm afraid this morning's fruschtique*- as Foka the cookalls it- has disagreed with me."
	*Fruhstuck: breakfast.
	"What is the matter with you, my darling? You look pale. Oh, you areery pale!" said Princess Mary in alarm, running with her soft,onderous steps up to her sister-in-law.
	"Your excellency, should not Mary Bogdanovna be sent for?" saidne of the maids who was present. (Mary Bogdanovna was a midwiferom the neighboring town, who had been at Bald Hills for the lastortnight.)
	"Oh yes," assented Princess Mary, "perhaps that's it. I'll go.ourage, my angel." She kissed Lise and was about to leave the room.
	"Oh, no, no!" And besides the pallor and the physical suffering onhe little princess' face, an expression of childish fear ofnevitable pain showed itself.
	"No, it's only indigestion?... Say it's only indigestion, say so,ary! Say..." And the little princess began to cry capriciously like auffering child and to wring her little hands even with someffectation. Princess Mary ran out of the room to fetch Maryogdanovna.
	"Mon Dieu! Mon Dieu! Oh!" she heard as she left the room.
	The midwife was already on her way to meet her, rubbing her small,lump white hands with an air of calm importance.
	"Mary Bogdanovna, I think it's beginning!" said Princess Maryooking at the midwife with wide-open eyes of alarm.
	"Well, the Lord be thanked, Princess," said Mary Bogdanovna, notastening her steps. "You young ladies should not know anythingbout it."
	"But how is it the doctor from Moscow is not here yet?" said therincess. (In accordance with Lise's and Prince Andrew's wishes theyad sent in good time to Moscow for a doctor and were expecting him atny moment.)
	"No matter, Princess, don't be alarmed," said Mary Bogdanovna.We'll manage very well without a doctor."
	Five minutes later Princess Mary from her room heard something heavyeing carried by. She looked out. The men servants were carrying thearge leather sofa from Prince Andrew's study into the bedroom. Onheir faces was a quiet and solemn look.
	Princess Mary sat alone in her room listening to the sounds in theouse, now and then opening her door when someone passed andatching what was going on in the passage. Some women passing withuiet steps in and out of the bedroom glanced at the princess andurned away. She did not venture to ask any questions, and shut theoor again, now sitting down in her easy chair, now taking herrayer book, now kneeling before the icon stand. To her surprise andistress she found that her prayers did not calm her excitement.uddenly her door opened softly and her old nurse, Praskovya Savishna,ho hardly ever came to that room as the old prince had forbiddent, appeared on the threshold with a shawl round her head.
	"I've come to sit with you a bit, Masha," said the nurse, "andere I've brought the prince's wedding candles to light before hisaint, my angel," she said with a sigh.
	"Oh, nurse, I'm so glad!"
	"God is merciful, birdie."
	The nurse lit the gilt candles before the icons and sat down byhe door with her knitting. Princess Mary took a book and beganeading. Only when footsteps or voices were heard did they look at onenother, the princess anxious and inquiring, the nurse encouraging.veryone in the house was dominated by the same feeling thatrincess Mary experienced as she sat in her room. But owing to theuperstition that the fewer the people who know of it the less a womann travail suffers, everyone tried to pretend not to know; no onepoke of it, but apart from the ordinary staid and respectful goodanners habitual in the prince's household, a common anxiety, aoftening of the heart, and a consciousness that something great andysterious was being accomplished at that moment made itself felt.
	There was no laughter in the maids' large hall. In the men servants'all all sat waiting, silently and alert. In the outlying serfs'uarters torches and candles were burning and no one slept. The oldrince, stepping on his heels, paced up and down his study and sentikhon to ask Mary Bogdanovna what news.- "Say only that 'the princeold me to ask,' and come and tell me her answer."
	"Inform the prince that labor has begun," said Mary Bogdanovna,iving the messenger a significant look.
	Tikhon went and told the prince.
	"Very good!" said the prince closing the door behind him, and Tikhonid not hear the slightest sound from the study after that.
	After a while he re-entered it as if to snuff the candles, and,eeing the prince was lying on the sofa, looked at him, noticed hiserturbed face, shook his head, and going up to him silently kissedim on the shoulder and left the room without snuffing the candlesr saying why he had entered. The most solemn mystery in the worldontinued its course. Evening passed, night came, and the feeling ofuspense and softening of heart in the presence of the unfathomableid not lessen but increased. No one slept.
	It was one of those March nights when winter seems to wish to resumets sway and scatters its last snows and storms with desperate fury. Aelay of horses had been sent up the highroad to meet the Germanoctor from Moscow who was expected every moment, and men on horsebackith lanterns were sent to the crossroads to guide him over theountry road with its hollows and snow-covered pools of water.
	Princess Mary had long since put aside her book: she sat silent, heruminous eyes fixed on her nurse's wrinkled face (every line ofhich she knew so well), on the lock of gray hair that escaped fromnder the kerchief, and the loose skin that hung under her chin.
	Nurse Savishna, knitting in hand, was telling in low tones, scarcelyearing or understanding her own words, what she had told hundredsf times before: how the late princess had given birth to Princessary in Kishenev with only a Moldavian peasant woman to help insteadf a midwife.
	"God is merciful, doctors are never needed," she said.
	Suddenly a gust of wind beat violently against the casement of theindow, from which the double frame had been removed (by order ofhe prince, one window frame was removed in each room as soon as thearks returned), and, forcing open a loosely closed latch, set theamask curtain flapping and blew out the candle with its chill,nowy draft. Princess Mary shuddered; her nurse, putting down thetocking she was knitting, went to the window and leaning out tried toatch the open casement. The cold wind flapped the ends of hererchief and her loose locks of gray hair.
	"Princess, my dear, there's someone driving up the avenue! " sheaid, holding the casement and not closing it. "With lanterns. Mostikely the doctor."
	"Oh, my God! thank God!" said Princess Mary. "I must go and meetim, he does not know Russian."
	Princess Mary threw a shawl over her head and ran to meet theewcomer. As she was crossing the anteroom she saw through theindow a carriage with lanterns, standing at the entrance. She wentut on the stairs. On a banister post stood a tallow candle whichuttered in the draft. On the landing below, Philip, the footman,tood looking scared and holding another candle. Still lower, beyondhe turn of the staircase, one could hear the footstep of someone inhick felt boots, and a voice that seemed familiar to Princess Maryas saying something.
	"Thank God!" said the voice. "And Father?"
	"Gone to bed," replied the voice of Demyan the house steward, whoas downstairs.
	Then the voice said something more, Demyan replied, and the steps inhe felt boots approached the unseen bend of the staircase moreapidly.
	"It's Andrew!" thought Princess Mary. "No it can't be, that would beoo extraordinary," and at the very moment she thought this, theace and figure of Prince Andrew, in a fur cloak the deep collar ofhich covered with snow, appeared on the landing where the footmantood with the candle. Yes, it was he, pale, thin, with a changednd strangely softened but agitated expression on his face. He came uphe stairs and embraced his sister.
	"You did not get my letter?" he asked, and not waiting for aeply- which he would not have received, for the princess was unableo speak- he turned back, rapidly mounted the stairs again with theoctor who had entered the hall after him (they had met at the lastost station), and again embraced his sister.
	"What a strange fate, Masha darling!" And having taken off his cloaknd felt boots, he went to the little princess' apartment.BK4|CH9
	CHAPTER IX
	The little princess lay supported by pillows, with a white cap oner head (the pains had just left her). Strands of her black hairay round her inflamed and perspiring cheeks, her charming rosyouth with its downy lip was open and she was smiling joyfully. Princendrew entered and paused facing her at the foot of the sofa onhich she was lying. Her glittering eyes, filled with childlike fearnd excitement, rested on him without changing their expression. "Iove you all and have done no harm to anyone; why must I suffer so?elp me!" her look seemed to say. She saw her husband, but did notealize the significance of his appearance before her now. Princendrew went round the sofa and kissed her forehead.
	"My darling!" he said- a word he had never used to her before.God is merciful...."
	She looked at him inquiringly and with childlike reproach.
	"I expected help from you and I get none, none from you either!"aid her eyes. She was not surprised at his having come; she did notealize that he had come. His coming had nothing to do with herufferings or with their relief. The pangs began again and Maryogdanovna advised Prince Andrew to leave the room.
	The doctor entered. Prince Andrew went out and, meeting Princessary, again joined her. They began talking in whispers, but their talkroke off at every moment. They waited and listened.
	"Go, dear," said Princess Mary.
	Prince Andrew went again to his wife and sat waiting in the roomext to hers. A woman came from the bedroom with a frightened face andecame confused when she saw Prince Andrew. He covered his face withis hands and remained so for some minutes. Piteous, helpless,nimal moans came through the door. Prince Andrew got up, went tohe door, and tried to open it. Someone was holding it shut.
	"You can't come in! You can't!" said a terrified voice from within.
	He began pacing the room. The screaming ceased, and a few moreeconds went by. Then suddenly a terrible shriek- it could not beers, she could not scream like that- came from the bedroom. Princendrew ran to the door; the scream ceased and he heard the wail ofn infant.
	"What have they taken a baby in there for?" thought Prince Andrew inhe first second. "A baby? What baby...? Why is there a baby there? Ors the baby born?"
	Then suddenly he realized the joyful significance of that wail;ears choked him, and leaning his elbows on the window sill be begano cry, sobbing like a child. The door opened. The doctor with hishirt sleeves tucked up, without a coat, pale and with a tremblingaw, came out of the room. Prince Andrew turned to him, but the doctorave him a bewildered look and passed by without a word. A womanushed out and seeing Prince Andrew stopped, hesitating on thehreshold. He went into his wife's room. She was lying dead, in theame position he had seen her in five minutes before and, despitehe fixed eyes and the pallor of the cheeks, the same expression wasn her charming childlike face with its upper lip covered with tinylack hair.
	"I love you all, and have done no harm to anyone; and what haveou done to me?"- said her charming, pathetic, dead face.
	In a corner of the room something red and tiny gave a grunt andquealed in Mary Bogdanovna's trembling white hands.
	Two hours later Prince Andrew, stepping softly, went into hisather's room. The old man already knew everything. He was standinglose to the door and as soon as it opened his rough old arms closedike a vise round his son's neck, and without a word he began to sobike a child.
	Three days later the little princess was buried, and Prince Andrewent up the steps to where the coffin stood, to give her thearewell kiss. And there in the coffin was the same face, thoughith closed eyes. "Ah, what have you done to me?" it still seemed toay, and Prince Andrew felt that something gave way in his soul andhat he was guilty of a sin he could neither remedy nor forget. Heould not weep. The old man too came up and kissed the waxen littleands that lay quietly crossed one on the other on her breast, ando him, too, her face seemed to say: "Ah, what have you done to me,nd why?" And at the sight the old man turned angrily away.
	Another five days passed, and then the young Prince Nicholasndreevich was baptized. The wet nurse supported the coverlet with herhile the priest with a goose feather anointed the boy's little rednd wrinkled soles and palms.
	His grandfather, who was his godfather, trembling and afraid ofropping him, carried the infant round the battered tin font andanded him over to the godmother, Princess Mary. Prince Andrew satn another room, faint with fear lest the baby should be drowned inhe font, and awaited the termination of the ceremony. He looked upoyfully at the baby when the nurse brought it to him and noddedpproval when she told him that the wax with the baby's hair had notunk in the font but had floated.BK4|CH10
	CHAPTER X
	Rostov's share in Dolokhov's duel with Bezukhov was hushed up by thefforts of the old count, and instead of being degraded to the rankss he expected he was appointed an adjutant to the governor general ofoscow. As a result he could not go to the country with the rest ofhe family, but was kept all summer in Moscow by his new duties.olokhov recovered, and Rostov became very friendly with him duringis convalescence. Dolokhov lay ill at his mother's who loved himassionately and tenderly, and old Mary Ivanovna, who had grown fondf Rostov for his friendship to her Fedya, often talked to him abouter son.
	"Yes, Count," she would say, "he is too noble and pure-souled forur present, depraved world. No one now loves virtue; it seems like reproach to everyone. Now tell me, Count, was it right, was itonorable, of Bezukhov? And Fedya, with his noble spirit, loved himnd even now never says a word against him. Those pranks in Petersburghen they played some tricks on a policeman, didn't they do itogether? And there! Bezukhov got off scotfree, while Fedya had toear the whole burden on his shoulders. Fancy what he had to gohrough! It's true he has been reinstated, but how could they failo do that? I think there were not many such gallant sons of theatherland out there as he. And now- this duel! Have these people noeeling, or honor? Knowing him to be an only son, to challenge him andhoot so straight! It's well God had mercy on us. And what was it for?ho doesn't have intrigues nowadays? Why, if he was so jealous, as Iee things he should have shown it sooner, but he lets it go on foronths. And then to call him out, reckoning on Fedya not fightingecause he owed him money! What baseness! What meanness! I know younderstand Fedya, my dear count; that, believe me, is why I am so fondf you. Few people do understand him. He is such a lofty, heavenlyoul!"
	Dolokhov himself during his convalescence spoke to Rostov in a wayo one would have expected of him.
	"I know people consider me a bad man!" he said. "Let them! I don'tare a straw about anyone but those I love; but those I love, I loveo that I would give my life for them, and the others I'd throttlef they stood in my way. I have an adored, a priceless mother, and twor three friends- you among them- and as for the rest I only carebout them in so far as they are harmful or useful. And most of themre harmful, especially the women. Yes, dear boy," he continued, "Iave met loving, noble, high-minded men, but I have not yet met anyomen- countesses or cooks- who were not venal. I have not yet methat divine purity and devotion I look for in women. If I found such ane I'd give my life for her! But those!... and he made a gesture ofontempt. "And believe me, if I still value my life it is only because still hope to meet such a divine creature, who will regenerate,urify, and elevate me. But you don't understand it."
	"Oh, yes, I quite understand, "answered Rostov, who was under hisew friend's influence.
	In the autumn the Rostovs returned to Moscow. Early in the winterenisov also came back and stayed with them. The first half of theinter of 1806, which Nicholas Rostov spent in Moscow, was one ofhe happiest, merriest times for him and the whole family. Nicholasrought many young men to his parents' house. Vera was a handsome girlf twenty; Sonya a girl of sixteen with all the charm of an openinglower; Natasha, half grown up and half child, was now childishlymusing, now girlishly enchanting.
	At that time in the Rostovs' house there prevailed an amoroustmosphere characteristic of homes where there are very young and veryharming girls. Every young man who came to the house- seeing thosempressionable, smiling young faces (smiling probably at their ownappiness), feeling the eager bustle around him, and hearing theitful bursts of song and music and the inconsequent but friendlyrattle of young girls ready for anything and full of hope-xperienced the same feeling; sharing with the young folk of theostovs' household a readiness to fall in love and an expectation ofappiness.
	Among the young men introduced by Rostov one of the first wasolokhov, whom everyone in the house liked except Natasha. Shelmost quarreled with her brother about him. She insisted that heas a bad man, and that in the duel with Bezukhov, Pierre was rightnd Dolokhov wrong, and further that he was disagreeable andnnatural.
	"There's nothing for me to understand," cried out with resoluteelf-will, "he is wicked and heartless. There now, I like your Denisovhough he is a rake and all that, still I like him; so you see I donderstand. I don't know how to put it... with this one everythings calculated, and I don't like that. But Denisov..."
	"Oh, Denisov is quite different," replied Nicholas, implying thatven Denisov was nothing compared to Dolokhov- "you must understandhat a soul there is in Dolokhov, you should see him with hisother. What a heart!"
	"Well, I don't know about that, but I am uncomfortable with him. Ando you know he has fallen in love with Sonya?"
	"What nonsense..."
	"I'm certain of it; you'll see."
	Natasha's prediction proved true. Dolokhov, who did not usually careor the society of ladies, began to come often to the house, and theuestion for whose sake he came (though no one spoke of it) was soonettled. He came because of Sonya. And Sonya, though she would neverave dared to say so, knew it and blushed scarlet every timeolokhov appeared.
	Dolokhov often dined at the Rostovs', never missed a performancet which they were present, and went to Iogel's balls for young peoplehich the Rostovs always attended. He was pointedly attentive to Sonyand looked at her in such a way that not only could she not bear hislances without coloring, but even the old countess and Natashalushed when they saw his looks.
	It was evident that this strange, strong man was under therresistible influence of the dark, graceful girl who loved another.
	Rostov noticed something new in Dolokhov's relations with Sonya, bute did not explain to himself what these new relations were.They're always in love with someone," he thought of Sonya andatasha. But he was not as much at ease with Sonya and Dolokhov asefore and was less frequently at home.
	In the autumn of 1806 everybody had again begun talking of the warith Napoleon with even greater warmth than the year before. Ordersere given to raise recruits, ten men in every thousand for theegular army, and besides this, nine men in every thousand for theilitia. Everywhere Bonaparte was anathematized and in Moscowothing but the coming war was talked of. For the Rostov family thehole interest of these preparations for war lay in the fact thaticholas would not hear of remaining in Moscow, and only awaited theermination of Denisov's furlough after Christmas to return with himo their regiment. His approaching departure did not prevent hismusing himself, but rather gave zest to his pleasures. He spent thereater part of his time away from home, at dinners, parties, andalls.BK4|CH11
	CHAPTER XI
	On the third day after Christmas Nicholas dined at home, a thinge had rarely done of late. It was a grand farewell dinner, as hend Denisov were leaving to join their regiment after Epiphany.bout twenty people were present, including Dolokhov and Denisov.
	Never had love been so much in the air, and never had the amoroustmosphere made itself so strongly felt in the Rostovs' house as athis holiday time. "Seize the moments of happiness, love and be loved!hat is the only reality in the world, all else is folly. It is thene thing we are interested in here," said the spirit of the place.
	Nicholas, having as usual exhausted two pairs of horses, withoutisiting all the places he meant to go to and where he had beennvited, returned home just before dinner. As soon as he entered heoticed and felt the tension of the amorous air in the house, and alsooticed a curious embarrassment among some of those present. Sonya,olokhov, and the old countess were especially disturbed, and to aesser degree Natasha. Nicholas understood that something must haveappened between Sonya and Dolokhov before dinner, and with the kindlyensitiveness natural to him was very gentle and wary with them botht dinner. On that same evening there was to be one of the ballshat Iogel (the dancing master) gave for his pupils durings theolidays.
	"Nicholas, will you come to Iogel's? Please do!" said Natasha. "Hesked you, and Vasili Dmitrich* is also going."
	*Denisov.
	"Where would I not go at the countess' command!" said Denisov, whot the Rostovs' had jocularly assumed the role of Natasha's knight.I'm even weady to dance the pas de chale."
	"If I have time," answered Nicholas. "But I promised therkharovs; they have a party."
	"And you?" he asked Dolokhov, but as soon as he had asked theuestion he noticed that it should not have been put.
	"Perhaps," coldly and angrily replied Dolokhov, glancing at Sonya,nd, scowling, he gave Nicholas just such a look as he had givenierre at the Club dinner.
	"There is something up," thought Nicholas, and he was furtheronfirmed in this conclusion by the fact that Dolokhov leftmmediately after dinner. He called Natasha and asked her what was theatter.
	"And I was looking for you," said Natasha running out to him. "Iold you, but you would not believe it," she said triumphantly. "Heas proposed to Sonya!"
	Little as Nicholas had occupied himself with Sonya of late,omething seemed to give way within him at this news. Dolokhov was auitable and in some respects a brilliant match for the dowerless,rphan girl. From the point of view of the old countess and of societyt was out of the question for her to refuse him. And thereforeicholas' first feeling on hearing the news was one of anger withonya.... He tried to say, "That's capital; of course she'll forgeter childish promises and accept the offer," but before he had time toay it Natasha began again.
	"And fancy! she refused him quite definitely!" adding, after aause, "she told him she loved another."
	"Yes, my Sonya could not have done otherwise!" thought Nicholas.
	"Much as Mamma pressed her, she refused, and I know she won't changence she has said..."
	"And Mamma pressed her!" said Nicholas reproachfully.
	"Yes," said Natasha. "Do you know, Nicholas- don't be angry- but Inow you will not marry her. I know, heaven knows how, but I knowor certain that you won't marry her."
	"Now don't know that at all!" said Nicholas. "But I must talk toer. What a darling Sonya is!" he added with a smile.
	"Ah, she is indeed a darling! I'll send her to you."
	And Natasha kissed her brother and ran away.
	A minute later Sonya came in with a frightened, guilty, and scaredook. Nicholas went up to her and kissed her hand. This was theirst time since his return that they had talked alone and about theirove.
	"Sophie," he began, timidly at first and then more and moreoldly, "if you wish to refuse one who is not only a brilliant anddvantageous match but a splendid, noble fellow... he is my friend..."
	Sonya interrupted him.
	"I have already refused," she said hurriedly.
	"If you are refusing for my sake, I am afraid that I..."
	Sonya again interrupted. She gave him an imploring, frightened look.
	"Nicholas, don't tell me that!" she said.
	"No, but I must. It may be arrogant of me, but still it is best toay it. If you refuse him on my account, I must tell you the wholeruth. I love you, and I think I love you more than anyone else...."
	"That is enough for me," said Sonya, blushing.
	"No, but I have been in love a thousand times and shall fall in lovegain, though for no one have I such a feeling of friendship,onfidence, and love as I have for you. Then I am young. Mamma doesot wish it. In a word, I make no promise. And I beg you to considerolokhov's offer," he said, articulating his friend's name withifficulty.
	"Don't say that to me! I want nothing. I love you as a brother andlways shall, and I want nothing more."
	"You are an angel: I am not worthy of you, but I am afraid ofisleading you."
	And Nicholas again kissed her hand.BK4|CH12
	CHAPTER XII
	Iogel's were the most enjoyable balls in Moscow. So said the motherss they watched their young people executing their newly learnedteps, and so said the youths and maidens themselves as they dancedill they were ready to drop, and so said the grown-up young men andomen who came to these balls with an air of condescension and foundhem most enjoyable. That year two marriages had come of thesealls. The two pretty young Princesses Gorchakov met suitors there andere married and so further increased the fame of these dances. Whatistinguished them from others was the absence of host or hostessnd the presence of the good-natured Iogel, flying about like aeather and bowing according to the rules of his art, as heollected the tickets from all his visitors. There was the fact thatnly those came who wished to dance and amuse themselves as girls ofhirteen and fourteen do who are wearing long dresses for the firstime. With scarcely any exceptions they all were, or seemed to be,retty- so rapturous were their smiles and so sparkling their eyes.ometimes the best of the pupils, of whom Natasha, who wasxceptionally graceful, was first, even danced the pas de chale, butt this last ball only the ecossaise, the anglaise, and the mazurka,hich was just coming into fashion, were danced. Iogel had taken aallroom in Bezukhov's house, and the ball, as everyone said, was areat success. There were many pretty girls and the Rostov girlsere among the prettiest. They were both particularly happy and gay.hat evening, proud of Dolokhov's proposal, her refusal, and herxplanation with Nicholas, Sonya twirled about before she left home sohat the maid could hardly get her hair plaited, and she wasransparently radiant with impulsive joy.
	Natasha no less proud of her first long dress and of being at a realall was even happier. They were both dressed in white muslin withink ribbons.
	Natasha fell in love the very moment she entered the ballroom. Sheas not in love with anyone in particular, but with everyone. Whatevererson she happened to look at she was in love with for that moment.
	"Oh, how delightful it is!" she kept saying, running up to Sonya.
	Nicholas and Denisov were walking up and down, looking with kindlyatronage at the dancers.
	"How sweet she is- she will be a weal beauty!" said Denisov.
	"Who?"
	"Countess Natasha," answered Denisov.
	"And how she dances! What gwace!" he said again after a pause.
	"Who are you talking about?"
	"About your sister," ejaculated Denisov testily.
	Rostov smiled.
	"My dear count, you were one of my best pupils- you must dance,"aid little Iogel coming up to Nicholas. "Look how many charming youngadies-" He turned with the same request to Denisov who was also aormer pupil of his.
	"No, my dear fellow, I'll be a wallflower," said Denisov. "Don't youecollect what bad use I made of your lessons?"
	"Oh no!" said Iogel, hastening to reassure him. "You were onlynattentive, but you had talent- oh yes, you had talent!"
	 The band struck up the newly introduced mazurka. Nicholas could notefuse Iogel and asked Sonya to dance. Denisov sat down by the oldadies and, leaning on his saber and beating time with his foot,old them something funny and kept them amused, while he watched theoung people dancing, Iogel with Natasha, his pride and his bestupil, were the first couple. Noiselessly, skillfully stepping withis little feet in low shoes, Iogel flew first across the hall withatasha, who, though shy, went on carefully executing her steps.enisov did not take his eyes off her and beat time with his sabern a way that clearly indicated that if he was not dancing it wasecause he would not and not because he could not. In the middle of figure he beckoned to Rostov who was passing:
	"This is not at all the thing," he said. "What sort of Polishazuwka is this? But she does dance splendidly."
	Knowing that Denisov had a reputation even in Poland for theasterly way in which he danced the mazurka, Nicholas ran up toatasha:
	"Go and choose Denisov. He is a real dancer, a wonder!" he said.
	When it came to Natasha's turn to choose a partner, she rose and,ripping rapidly across in her little shoes trimmed with bows, ranimidly to the corner where Denisov sat. She saw that everybody wasooking at her and waiting. Nicholas saw that Denisov was refusinghough he smiled delightedly. He ran up to them.
	"Please, Vasili Dmitrich," Natasha was saying, "do come!"
	"Oh no, let me off, Countess," Denisov replied.
	"Now then, Vaska," said Nicholas.
	"They coax me as if I were Vaska the cat!" said Denisov jokingly.
	"I'll sing for you a whole evening," said Natasha.
	"Oh, the faiwy! She can do anything with me!" said Denisov, and henhooked his saber. He came out from behind the chairs, clasped hisartner's hand firmly, threw back his head, and advanced his foot,aiting for the beat. Only on horse back and in the mazurka wasenisov's short stature not noticeable and he looked the fine fellowe felt himself to be. At the right beat of the music he lookedideways at his partner with a merry and triumphant air, suddenlytamped with one foot, bounded from the floor like a ball, and flewound the room taking his partner with him. He glided silently onne foot half across the room, and seeming not to notice the chairsas dashing straight at them, when suddenly, clinking his spurs andpreading out his legs, he stopped short on his heels, stood so aecond, stamped on the spot clanking his spurs, whirled rapidly round,nd, striking his left heel against his right, flew round again in aircle. Natasha guessed what he meant to do, and abandoning herself toim followed his lead hardly knowing how. First he spun her round,olding her now with his left, now with his right hand, then fallingn one knee he twirled her round him, and again jumping up, dashedo impetuously forward that it seemed as if he would rush throughhe whole suite of rooms without drawing breath, and then heuddenly stopped and performed some new and unexpected steps. Whent last, smartly whirling his partner round in front of her chair,e drew up with a click of his spurs and bowed to her, Natasha did notven make him a curtsy. She fixed her eyes on him in amazement,miling as if she did not recognize him.
	"What does this mean?" she brought out.
	Although Iogel did not acknowledge this to be the real mazurka,veryone was delighted with Denisov's skill, he was asked again andgain as a partner, and the old men began smilingly to talk aboutoland and the good old days. Denisov, flushed after the mazurka andopping himself with his handkerchief, sat down by Natasha and did noteave her for the rest of the evening.BK4|CH13
	CHAPTER XIII
	For two days after that Rostov did not see Dolokhov at his own or atolokhov's home: on the third day he received a note from him:
	As I do not intend to be at your house again for reasons you knowf, and am going to rejoin my regiment, I am giving a farewellupper tonight to my friends- come to the English Hotel.
	About ten o'clock Rostov went to the English Hotel straight from theheater, where he had been with his family and Denisov. He was at oncehown to the best room, which Dolokhov had taken for that evening.ome twenty men were gathered round a table at which Dolokhov satetween two candles. On the table was a pile of gold and paperoney, and he was keeping the bank. Rostov had not seen him sinceis proposal and Sonya's refusal and felt uncomfortable at the thoughtf how they would meet.
	Dolokhov's clear, cold glance met Rostov as soon as he entered theoor, as though he had long expected him.
	"It's a long time since we met," he said. "Thanks for coming. I'llust finish dealing, and then Ilyushka will come with his chorus."
	"I called once or twice at your house," said Rostov, reddening.
	Dolokhov made no reply.
	"You may punt," he said.
	Rostov recalled at that moment a strange conversation he had oncead with Dolokhov. "None but fools trust to luck in play," Dolokhovad then said.
	"Or are you afraid to play with me?" Dolokhov now asked as ifuessing Rostov's thought.
	Beneath his smile Rostov saw in him the mood he had shown at thelub dinner and at other times, when as if tired of everyday life head felt a need to escape from it by some strange, and usuallyruel, action.
	Rostov felt ill at ease. He tried, but failed, to find some jokeith which to reply to Dolokhov's words. But before he had thoughtf anything, Dolokhov, looking straight in his face, said slowly andeliberately so that everyone could hear:
	"Do you remember we had a talk about cards... 'He's a fool whorusts to luck, one should make certain,' and I want to try."
	"To try his luck or the certainty?" Rostov asked himself.
	"Well, you'd better not play," Dolokhov added, and springing a newack of cards said: "Bank, gentlemen!"
	Moving the money forward he prepared to deal. Rostov sat down by hiside and at first did not play. Dolokhov kept glancing at him.
	"Why don't you play?" he asked.
	And strange to say Nicholas felt that he could not help taking up card, putting a small stake on it, and beginning to play.
	"I have no money with me," he said.
	"I'll trust you."
	Rostov staked five rubles on a card and lost, staked again, andgain lost. Dolokhov "killed," that is, beat, ten cards of Rostov'sunning.
	"Gentlemen," said Dolokhov after he had dealt for some time. "Pleaselace your money on the cards or I may get muddled in the reckoning."
	One of the players said he hoped he might be trusted.
	"Yes, you might, but I am afraid of getting the accounts mixed. So Isk you to put the money on your cards," replied Dolokhov. "Don'ttint yourself, we'll settle afterwards," he added, turning to Rostov.
	The game continued; a waiter kept handing round champagne.
	All Rostov's cards were beaten and he had eight hundred rublescored up against him. He wrote "800 rubles" on a card, but whilehe waiter filled his glass he changed his mind and altered it tois usual stake of twenty rubles.
	"Leave it," said Dolokhov, though he did not seem to be even lookingt Rostov, "you'll win it back all the sooner. I lose to the othersut win from you. Or are you afraid of me?" he asked again.
	Rostov submitted. He let the eight hundred remain and laid down aeven of hearts with a torn corner, which he had picked up from theloor. He well remembered that seven afterwards. He laid down theeven of hearts, on which with a broken bit of chalk he had written800 rubles" in clear upright figures; he emptied the glass of warmhampagne that was handed him, smiled at Dolokhov's words, and with sinking heart, waiting for a seven to turn up, gazed at Dolokhov'sands which held the pack. Much depended on Rostov's winning or losingn that seven of hearts. On the previous Sunday the old count hadiven his son two thousand rubles, and though he always dislikedpeaking of money difficulties had told Nicholas that this was alle could let him have till May, and asked him to be more economicalhis time. Nicholas had replied that it would be more than enoughor him and that he gave his word of honor not to take anything moreill the spring. Now only twelve hundred rubles was left of thatoney, so that this seven of hearts meant for him not only the loss ofixteen hundred rubles, but the necessity of going back on his word.ith a sinking heart he watched Dolokhov's hands and thought, "Nowhen, make haste and let me have this card and I'll take my cap andrive home to supper with Denisov, Natasha, and Sonya, and willertainly never touch a card again." At that moment his home life,okes with Petya, talks with Sonya, duets with Natasha, piquet withis father, and even his comfortable bed in the house on theovarskaya rose before him with such vividness, clearness, and charmhat it seemed as if it were all a lost and unappreciated bliss,ong past. He could not conceive that a stupid chance, letting theeven be dealt to the right rather than to the left, might deprive himf all this happiness, newly appreciated and newly illumined, andlunge him into the depths of unknown and undefined misery. That couldot be, yet he awaited with a sinking heart the movement of Dolokhov'sands. Those broad, reddish hands, with hairy wrists visible fromnder the shirt cuffs, laid down the pack and took up a glass and aipe that were handed him.
	"So you are not afraid to play with me?" repeated Dolokhov, and asf about to tell a good story he put down the cards, leaned back inis chair, and began deliberately with a smile:
	"Yes, gentlemen, I've been told there's a rumor going about Moscowhat I'm a sharper, so I advise you to be careful."
	"Come now, deal!" exclaimed Rostov.
	"Oh, those Moscow gossips!" said Dolokhov, and he took up theards with a smile.
	"Aah!" Rostov almost screamed lifting both hands to his head. Theeven he needed was lying uppermost, the first card in the pack. Head lost more than he could pay.
	"Still, don't ruin yourself!" said Dolokhov with a side glance atostov as he continued to deal.BK4|CH14
	CHAPTER XIV
	An hour and a half later most of the players were but littlenterested in their own play.
	The whole interest was concentrated on Rostov. Instead of sixteenundred rubles he had a long column of figures scored against him,hich he had reckoned up to ten thousand, but that now, as heaguely supposed, must have risen to fifteen thousand. In reality itlready exceeded twenty thousand rubles. Dolokhov was no longeristening to stories or telling them, but followed every movement ofostov's hands and occasionally ran his eyes over the score againstim. He had decided to play until that score reached forty-threehousand. He had fixed on that number because forty-three was theum of his and Sonya's joint ages. Rostov, leaning his head on bothands, sat at the table which was scrawled over with figures, wet withpilled wine, and littered with cards. One tormenting impression didot leave him: that those broad-boned reddish hands with hairyrists visible from under the shirt sleeves, those hands which heoved and hated, held him in their power.
	"Six hundred rubles, ace, a corner, a nine... winning it back'smpossible... Oh, how pleasant it was at home!... The knave, double oruits... it can't be!... And why is he doing this to me?" Rostovondered. Sometimes he staked a large sum, but Dolokhov refused toccept it and fixed the stake himself. Nicholas submitted to him,nd at one moment prayed to God as he had done on the battlefield athe bridge over the Enns, and then guessed that the card that cameirst to hand from the crumpled heap under the table would save him,ow counted the cords on his coat and took a card with that number andried staking the total of his losses on it, then he looked roundor aid from the other players, or peered at the now cold face ofolokhov and tried to read what was passing in his mind.
	"He knows of course what this loss means to me. He can't want myuin. Wasn't he my friend? Wasn't I fond of him? But it's not hisault. What's he to do if he has such luck?... And it's not my faultither," he thought to himself, "I have done nothing wrong. Have Iilled anyone, or insulted or wished harm to anyone? Why such aerrible misfortune? And when did it begin? Such a little while ago came to this table with the thought of winning a hundred rubles touy that casket for Mamma's name day and then going home. I was soappy, so free, so lighthearted! And I did not realize how happy Ias! When did that end and when did this new, terrible state of thingsegin? What marked the change? I sat all the time in this same placet this table, chose and placed cards, and watched those broad-bonedgile hands in the same way. When did it happen and what has happened? am well and strong and still the same and in the same place. No,t can't be! Surely it will all end in nothing!"
	He was flushed and bathed in perspiration, though the room was notot. His face was terrible and piteous to see, especially from itselpless efforts to seem calm.
	The score against him reached the fateful sum of forty-threehousand. Rostov had just prepared a card, by bending the corner ofhich he meant to double the three thousand just put down to hiscore, when Dolokhov, slamming down the pack of cards, put it asidend began rapidly adding up the total of Rostov's debt, breaking thehalk as he marked the figures in his clear, bold hand.
	"Supper, it's time for supper! And here are the gypsies!"
	Some swarthy men and women were really entering from the coldutside and saying something in their gypsy accents. Nicholasnderstood that it was all over; but he said in an indifferent tone:
	"Well, won't you go on? I had a splendid card all ready," as if itere the fun of the game which interested him most.
	"It's all up! I'm lost!" thought he. "Now a bullet through my brain-hat's all that's left me! " And at the same time he said in aheerful voice:
	"Come now, just this one more little card!"
	"All right!" said Dolokhov, having finished the addition. "Allight! Twenty-one rubles," he said, pointing to the figurewenty-one by which the total exceeded the round sum of forty-threehousand; and taking up a pack he prepared to deal. Rostovubmissively unbent the corner of his card and, instead of the sixhousand he had intended, carefully wrote twenty-one.
	"It's all the same to me," he said. "I only want to see whetherou will let me win this ten, or beat it."
	Dolokhov began to deal seriously. Oh, how Rostov detested at thatoment those hands with their short reddish fingers and hairyrists, which held him in their power.... The ten fell to him.
	"You owe forty-three thousand, Count," said Dolokhov, and stretchingimself he rose from the table. "One does get tired sitting soong," he added.
	"Yes, I'm tired too," said Rostov.
	Dolokhov cut him short, as if to remind him that it was not forim to jest.
	"When am I to receive the money, Count?"
	Rostov, flushing, drew Dolokhov into the next room.
	"I cannot pay it all immediately. Will you take an I.O.U.?" he said.
	"I say, Rostov," said Dolokhov clearly, smiling and looking Nicholastraight in the eyes, "you know the saying, 'Lucky in love, unlucky atards.' Your cousin is in love with you, I know."
	"Oh, it's terrible to feel oneself so in this man's power,"hought Rostov. He knew what a shock he would inflict on his fathernd mother by the news of this loss, he knew what a relief it would beo escape it all, and felt that Dolokhov knew that he could save himrom all this shame and sorrow, but wanted now to play with him as aat does with a mouse.
	"Your cousin..." Dolokhov started to say, but Nicholas interruptedim.
	"My cousin has nothing to do with this and it's not necessary toention her!" he exclaimed fiercely.
	"Then when am I to have it?"
	"Tomorrow," replied Rostov and left the room.BK4|CH15
	CHAPTER XV
	To say "tomorrow" and keep up a dignified tone was not difficult,ut to go home alone, see his sisters, brother, mother, and father,onfess and ask for money he had no right to after giving his wordf honor, was terrible.
	At home, they had not yet gone to bed. The young people, aftereturning from the theater, had had supper and were grouped roundhe clavichord. As soon as Nicholas entered, he was enfolded in thatoetic atmosphere of love which pervaded the Rostov household thatinter and, now after Dolokhov's proposal and Iogel's ball, seemedo have grown thicker round Sonya and Natasha as the air does before ahunderstorm. Sonya and Natasha, in the light-blue dresses they hadorn at the theater, looking pretty and conscious of it, were standingy the clavichord, happy and smiling. Vera was playing chess withhinshin in the drawing room. The old countess, waiting for the returnf her husband and son, sat playing patience with the oldentlewoman who lived in their house. Denisov, with sparkling eyes anduffled hair, sat at the clavichord striking chords with his shortingers, his legs thrown back and his eyes rolling as he sang, withis small, husky, but true voice, some verses called "Enchantress,"hich he had composed, and to which he was trying to fit music:
	   Enchantress, say, to my forsaken lyre
	   What magic power is this recalls me still?
	   What spark has set my inmost soul on fire,
	   What is this bliss that makes my fingers thrill?e was singing in passionate tones, gazing with gazing with hisparkling black-agate eyes at the frightened and happy Natasha.
	"Splendid! Excellent!" exclaimed Natasha. "Another verse, sheaid, without noticing Nicholas.
	"Everything's still the same with them," thought Nicholas,lancing into the drawing room, where he saw Vera and his motherith the old lady.
	"Ah, and here's Nicholas!" cried Natasha, running up to him.
	"Is Papa at home?" he asked.
	"I am so glad you've come!" said Natasha, without answering him. "Were enjoying ourselves! Vasili Dmitrich is staying a day longer for myake! Did you know?"
	"No, Papa is not back yet," said Sonya.
	"Nicholas, have you come? Come here, dear!" called the oldountess from the drawing room.
	Nicholas went to her, kissed her hand, and sitting down silentlyt her table began to watch her hands arranging the cards. From theancing room, they still heard the laughter and merry voices trying toersuade Natasha to sing.
	"All wight! All wight!" shouted Denisov. "It's no good makingxcuses now! It's your turn to sing the ba'cawolla- I entweat you!"
	The countess glanced at her silent son.
	"What is the matter?" she asked.
	"Oh, nothing," said he, as if weary of being continually asked theame question. "Will Papa be back soon?"
	"I expect so."
	"Everything's the same with them. They know nothing about it!here am I to go?" thought Nicholas, and went again into the dancingoom where the clavichord stood.
	Sonya was sitting at the clavichord, playing the prelude toenisov's favorite barcarolle. Natasha was preparing to sing.enisov was looking at her with enraptured eyes.
	Nicholas began pacing up and down the room.
	"Why do they want to make her sing? How can she sing? There'sothing to be happy about!" thought he.
	Sonya struck the first chord of the prelude.
	"My God, I'm a ruined and dishonored man! A bullet through myrain is the only thing left me- not singing! " his thoughts ran on.Go away? But where to? It's one- let them sing!"
	He continued to pace the room, looking gloomily at Denisov and theirls and avoiding their eyes.
	"Nikolenka, what is the matter?" Sonya's eyes fixed on him seemed tosk. She noticed at once that something had happened to him.
	Nicholas turned away from her. Natasha too, with her quick instinct,ad instantly noticed her brother's condition. But, though she noticedt, she was herself in such high spirits at that moment, so far fromorrow, sadness, or self-reproach, that she purposely deceived herselfs young people often do. "No, I am too happy now to spoil mynjoyment by sympathy with anyone's sorrow," she felt, and she said toerself: "No, I must be mistaken, he must be feeling happy, just as am."
	"Now, Sonya!" she said, going to the very middle of the room,here she considered the resonance was best.
	Having lifted her head and let her arms droop lifelessly, asallet dancers do, Natasha, rising energetically from her heels to heroes, stepped to the middle of the room and stood still.
	"Yes, that's me!" she seemed to say, answering the rapt gaze withhich Denisov followed her.
	"And what is she so pleased about?" thought Nicholas, looking at hisister. "Why isn't she dull and ashamed?"
	Natasha took the first note, her throat swelled, her chest rose, heryes became serious. At that moment she was oblivious of herurroundings, and from her smiling lips flowed sounds which anyone mayroduce at the same intervals hold for the same time, but whicheave you cold a thousand times and the thousand and first time thrillou and make you weep.
	Natasha, that winter, had for the first time begun to singeriously, mainly because Denisov so delighted in her singing. Sheo longer sang as a child, there was no longer in her singing thatomical, childish, painstaking effect that had been in it before;ut she did not yet sing well, as all the connoisseurs who heard heraid: "It is not trained, but it is a beautiful voice that must berained." Only they generally said this some time after she hadinished singing. While that untrained voice, with its incorrectreathing and labored transitions, was sounding, even the connoisseursaid nothing, but only delighted in it and wished to hear it again. Iner voice there was a virginal freshness, an unconsciousness of herwn powers, and an as yet untrained velvety softness, which so mingledith her lack of art in singing that it seemed as if nothing in thatoice could be altered without spoiling it.
	"What is this?" thought Nicholas, listening to her with widelypened eyes. "What has happened to her? How she is singing today!" Anduddenly the whole world centered for him on anticipation of theext note, the next phrase, and everything in the world was dividednto three beats: "Oh mio crudele affetto."... One, two, three... one,wo, three... One... "Oh mio crudele affetto."... One, two, three...ne. "Oh, this senseless life of ours!" thought Nicholas. "All thisisery, and money, and Dolokhov, and anger, and honor- it's allonsense... but this is real.... Now then, Natasha, now then, dearest!ow then, darling! How will she take that si? She's taken it! Thankod!" And without noticing that he was singing, to strengthen the sie sung a second, a third below the high note. "Ah, God! How fine! Did really take it? How fortunate!" he thought.
	Oh, how that chord vibrated, and how moved was something that wasinest in Rostov's soul! And this something was apart fromverything else in the world and above everything in the world.What were losses, and Dolokhov, and words of honor?... Allonsense! One might kill and rob and yet be happy..."BK4|CH16
	CHAPTER XVI
	It was long since Rostov had felt such enjoyment from music as heid that day. But no sooner had Natasha finished her barcarolle thaneality again presented itself. He got up without saying a word andent downstairs to his own room. A quarter of an hour later the oldount came in from his Club, cheerful and contented. Nicholas, hearingim drive up, went to meet him.
	"Well- had a good time?" said the old count, smiling gaily androudly at his son.
	Nicholas tried to say "Yes," but could not: and he nearly burst intoobs. The count was lighting his pipe and did not notice his son'sondition.
	"Ah, it can't be avoided!" thought Nicholas, for the first andast time. And suddenly, in the most casual tone, which made himeel ashamed feel of himself, he said, as if merely asking hisather to let him have the carriage to drive to town:
	"Papa, I have come on a matter of business. I was nearly forgetting. need some money."
	"Dear me!" said his father, who was in a specially good humor. "Iold you it would not be enough. How much?"
	"Very much," said Nicholas flushing, and with a stupid carelessmile, for which he was long unable to forgive himself, "I have lost aittle, I mean a good deal, a great deal- forty three thousand."
	"What! To whom?... Nonsense!" cried the count, suddenly reddeningith an apoplectic flush over neck and nape as old people do.
	"I promised to pay tomorrow," said Nicholas.
	"Well!..." said the old count, spreading out his arms and sinkingelplessly on the sofa.
	"It can't be helped It happens to everyone!" said the son, with aold, free, and easy tone, while in his soul he regarded himself as worthless scoundrel whose whole life could not atone for hisrime. He longed to kiss his father's hands and kneel to beg hisorgiveness, but said, in a careless and even rude voice, that itappens to everyone!
	The old count cast down his eyes on hearing his son's words andegan bustlingly searching for something.
	"Yes, yes," he muttered, "it will be difficult, I fear, difficult toaise... happens to everybody! Yes, who has not done it?"
	And with a furtive glance at his son's face, the count went out ofhe room.... Nicholas had been prepared for resistance, but had not atll expected this.
	"Papa! Pa-pa!" he called after him, sobbing, "forgive me!" Andeizing his father's hand, he pressed it to his lips and burst intoears.
	While father and son were having their explanation, the mother andaughter were having one not less important. Natasha came running toer mother, quite excited.
	"Mamma!... Mamma!... He has made me..."
	"Made what?"
	"Made, made me an offer, Mamma! Mamma!" she exclaimed.
	The countess did not believe her ears. Denisov had proposed. Tohom? To this chit of a girl, Natasha, who not so long ago was playingith dolls and who was still having lessons.
	"Don't, Natasha! What nonsense!" she said, hoping it was a joke.
	"Nonsense, indeed! I am telling you the fact," said Natashandignantly. "I come to ask you what to do, and you call itnonsense!'"
	The countess shrugged her shoulders.
	"If it true that Monsieur Denisov has made you a proposal, tellim he is a fool, that's all!"
	"No, he's not a fool!" replied Natasha indignantly and seriously.
	"Well then, what do you want? You're all in love nowadays. Well,f you are in love, marry him!" said the countess, with a laugh ofnnoyance. "Good luck to you!"
	"No, Mamma, I'm not in love with him, I suppose I'm not in love withim."
	"Well then, tell him so."
	"Mamma, are you cross? Don't be cross, dear! Is it my fault?"
	"No, but what is it, my dear? Do you want me to go and tell him?"aid the countess smiling.
	"No, I will do it myself, only tell me what to say. It's all veryell for you," said Natasha, with a responsive smile. "You should haveeen how he said it! I know he did not mean to say it, but it came outccidently."
	"Well, all the same, you must refuse him."
	"No, I mustn't. I am so sorry for him! He's so nice."
	"Well then, accept his offer. It's high time for you to be married,"nswered the countess sharply and sarcastically.
	"No, Mamma, but I'm so sorry for him. I don't know how I'm to sayt."
	"And there's nothing for you to say. I shall speak to him myself,"aid the countess, indignant that they should have dared to treat thisittle Natasha as grown up.
	"No, not on any account! I will tell him myself, and you'll listent the door," and Natasha ran across the drawing room to the dancingall, where Denisov was sitting on the same chair by the clavichordith his face in his hands.
	He jumped up at the sound of her light step.
	"Nataly," he said, moving with rapid steps toward her, "decide myate. It is in your hands."
	"Vasili Dmitrich, I'm so sorry for you!... No, but you are soice... but it won't do...not that... but as a friend, I shalllways love you."
	Denisov bent over her hand and she heard strange sounds she didot understand. She kissed his rough curly black head. At thisnstant, they heard the quick rustle of the countess' dress. Sheame up to them.
	"Vasili Dmitrich, I thank you for the honor," she said, with anmbarrassed voice, though it sounded severe to Denisov- "but myaughter is so young, and I thought that, as my son's friend, youould have addressed yourself first to me. In that case you wouldot have obliged me to give this refusal."
	"Countess..." said Denisov, with downcast eyes and a guilty face. Heried to say more, but faltered.
	Natasha could not remain calm, seeing him in such a plight. Sheegan to sob aloud.
	"Countess, I have done w'ong," Denisov went on in an unsteady voice,but believe me, I so adore your daughter and all your family that Iould give my life twice over..." He looked at the countess, andeeing her severe face said: "Well, good-by, Countess," and kissinger hand, he left the room with quick resolute strides, withoutooking at Natasha.
	Next day Rostov saw Denisov off. He not wish to stay another dayn Moscow. All Denisov's Moscow friends gave him a farewellntertainment at the gypsies', with the result that he had noecollection of how he was put in the sleigh or of the first threetages of his journey.
	After Denisov's departure, Rostov spent another fortnight in Moscow,ithout going out of the house, waiting for the money his father couldot at once raise, and he spent most of his time in the girls' room.
	Sonya was more tender and devoted to him than ever. It was as if sheanted to show him that his losses were an achievement that made herove him all the more, but Nicholas now considered himself unworthy ofer.
	He filled the girls' albums with verses and music, and having atast sent Dolokhov the whole forty-three thousand rubles andeceived his receipt, he left at the end of November, without takingeave of any of his acquaintances, to overtake his regiment whichas already in Poland.BK5	                            BOOK FIVE: 1806 - 07BK5|CH1
	CHAPTER I
	After his interview with his wife Pierre left for Petersburg. At theorzhok post station, either there were no horses or the postmasterould not supply them. Pierre was obliged to wait. Without undressing,e lay down on the leather sofa in front of a round table, put his bigeet in their overboots on the table, and began to reflect.
	"Will you have the portmanteaus brought in? And a bed got ready, andea?" asked his valet.
	Pierre gave no answer, for he neither heard nor saw anything. He hadegun to think of the last station and was still pondering on the sameuestion- one so important that he took no notice of what went onround him. Not only was he indifferent as to whether he got toetersburg earlier or later, or whether he secured accommodation athis station, but compared to the thoughts that now occupied him itas a matter of indifference whether he remained there for a few hoursr for the rest of his life.
	The postmaster, his wife, the valet, and a peasant woman sellingorzhok embroidery came into the room offering their services. Withouthanging his careless attitude, Pierre looked at them over hispectacles unable to understand what they wanted or how they couldo on living without having solved the problems that so absorbedim. He had been engrossed by the same thoughts ever since the daye returned from Sokolniki after the duel and had spent that firstgonizing, sleepless night. But now, in the solitude of the journey,hey seized him with special force. No matter what he thought about,e always returned to these same questions which he could not solvend yet could not cease to ask himself. It was as if the thread of thehief screw which held his life together were stripped, so that thecrew could not get in or out, but went on turning uselessly in theame place.
	The postmaster came in and began obsequiously to beg hisxcellency to wait only two hours, when, come what might, he would letis excellency have the courier horses. It was plain that he was lyingnd only wanted to get more money from the traveler.
	"Is this good or bad?" Pierre asked himself. "It is good for me, bador another traveler, and for himself it's unavoidable, because heeeds money for food; the man said an officer had once given him ahrashing for letting a private traveler have the courier horses.ut the officer thrashed him because he had to get on as quickly asossible. And I," continued Pierre, "shot Dolokhov because Ionsidered myself injured, and Louis XVI was executed because theyonsidered him a criminal, and a year later they executed those whoxecuted him- also for some reason. What is bad? What is good? Whathould one love and what hate? What does one live for? And what am? What is life, and what is death? What power governs all?"
	There was no answer to any of these questions, except one, andhat not a logical answer and not at all a reply to them. The answeras: "You'll die and all will end. You'll die and know all, or ceasesking." But dying was also dreadful.
	The Torzhok peddler woman, in a whining voice, went on offeringer wares, especially a pair of goatskin slippers. "I have hundreds ofubles I don't know what to do with, and she stands in her tatteredloak looking timidly at me," he thought. "And what does she wanthe money for? As if that money could add a hair's breadth toappiness or peace of mind. Can anything in the world make her or meess a prey to evil and death?- death which ends all and must comeoday or tomorrow- at any rate, in an instant as compared withternity." And again he twisted the screw with the stripped thread,nd again it turned uselessly in the same place.
	His servant handed him a half-cut novel, in the form of letters,y Madame de Souza. He began reading about the sufferings and virtuoustruggles of a certain Emilie de Mansfeld. "And why did she resist hereducer when she loved him?" he thought. "God could not have putnto her heart an impulse that was against His will. My wife- as shence was- did not struggle, and perhaps she was right. Nothing haseen found out, nothing discovered," Pierre again said to himself.All we can know is that we know nothing. And that's the height ofuman wisdom."
	Everything within and around him seemed confused, senseless, andepellent. Yet in this very repugnance to all his circumstances Pierreound a kind of tantalizing satisfaction.
	"I make bold to ask your excellency to move a little for thisentleman," said the postmaster, entering the room followed by anotherraveler, also detained for lack of horses.
	The newcomer was a short, large-boned, yellow-faced, wrinkled oldan, with gray bushy eyebrows overhanging bright eyes of an indefiniterayish color.
	Pierre took his feet off the table, stood up, and lay down on aed that had been got ready for him, glancing now and then at theewcomer, who, with a gloomy and tired face, was wearily taking offis wraps with the aid of his servant, and not looking at Pierre. With pair of felt boots on his thin bony legs, and keeping on a worn,ankeen-covered, sheepskin coat, the traveler sat down on the sofa,eaned back his big head with its broad temples and close-croppedair, and looked at Bezukhov. The stern, shrewd, and penetratingxpression of that look struck Pierre. He felt a wish to speak tohe stranger, but by the time he had made up his mind to ask him auestion about the roads, the traveler had closed his eyes. Hishriveled old hands were folded and on the finger of one of themierre noticed a large cast iron ring with a seal representing aeath's head. The stranger sat without stirring, either resting or, ast seemed to Pierre, sunk in profound and calm meditation. His servantas also a yellow, wrinkled old man, without beard or mustache,vidently not because he was shaven but because they had neverrown. This active old servant was unpacking the traveler's canteennd preparing tea. He brought in a boiling samovar. When everythingas ready, the stranger opened his eyes, moved to the table, filled tumbler with tea for himself and one for the beardless old man tohom he passed it. Pierre began to feel a sense of uneasiness, and theeed, even the inevitability, of entering into conversation withhis stranger.
	The servant brought back his tumbler turned upside down,* with annfinished bit of nibbled sugar, and asked if anything more would beanted.
	*To indicate he did not want more tea.
	"No. Give me the book," said the stranger.
	The servant handed him a book which Pierre took to be a devotionalork, and the traveler became absorbed in it. Pierre looked at him.ll at once the stranger closed the book, putting in a marker, andgain, leaning with his arms on the back of the sofa, sat in hisormer position with his eyes shut. Pierre looked at him and had notime to turn away when the old man, opening his eyes, fixed his steadynd severe gaze straight on Pierre's face.
	Pierre felt confused and wished to avoid that look, but the brightld eyes attracted him irresistibly.BK5|CH2
	CHAPTER II
	"I have the pleasure of addressing Count Bezukhov, if I am notistaken," said the stranger in a deliberate and loud voice.
	Pierre looked silently and inquiringly at him over his spectacles.
	"I have heard of you, my dear sir, "continued the stranger, "andf your misfortune." He seemed to emphasize the last word, as if toay- "Yes, misfortune! Call it what you please, I know that whatappened to you in Moscow was a misfortune."- "I regret it veryuch, my dear sir."
	Pierre flushed and, hurriedly putting his legs down from the bed,ent forward toward the old man with a forced and timid smile.
	"I have not referred to this out of curiosity, my dear sir, butor greater reasons."
	He paused, his gaze still on Pierre, and moved aside on the sofay way of inviting the other to take a seat beside him. Pierre felteluctant to enter into conversation with this old man, but,ubmitting to him involuntarily, came up and sat down beside him.
	"You are unhappy, my dear sir," the stranger continued. "You areoung and I am old. I should like to help you as far as lies in myower."
	"Oh, yes!" said Pierre, with a forced smile. "I am very gratefulo you. Where are you traveling from?"
	The stranger's face was not genial, it was even cold and severe, butn spite of this, both the face and words of his new acquaintance wererresistibly attractive to Pierre.
	"But if for reason you don't feel inclined to talk to me," saidhe old man, "say so, my dear sir." And he suddenly smiled, in annexpected and tenderly paternal way.
	"Oh no, not at all! On the contrary, I am very glad to make yourcquaintance," said Pierre. And again, glancing at the stranger'sands, he looked more closely at the ring, with its skull- a Masonicign.
	"Allow me to ask," he said, "are you a Mason?"
	"Yes, I belong to the Brotherhood of the Freemasons," said thetranger, looking deeper and deeper into Pierre's eyes. "And inheir name and my own I hold out a brotherly hand to you."
	"I am afraid," said Pierre, smiling, and wavering between theonfidence the personality of the Freemason inspired in him and hiswn habit of ridiculing the Masonic beliefs- "I am afraid I am veryar from understanding- how am I to put it?- I am afraid my way ofooking at the world is so opposed to yours that we shall notnderstand one another."
	"I know your outlook," said the Mason, "and the view of life youention, and which you think is the result of your own mental efforts,s the one held by the majority of people, and is the invariable fruitf pride, indolence, and ignorance. Forgive me, my dear sir, but if had not known it I should not have addressed you. Your view ofife is a regrettable delusion."
	"Just as I may suppose you to be deluded," said Pierre, with a faintmile.
	"I should never dare to say that I know the truth," said theason, whose words struck Pierre more and more by their precisionnd firmness. "No one can attain to truth by himself. Only by layingtone on stone with the cooperation of all, by the millions ofenerations from our forefather Adam to our own times, is thatemple reared which is to be a worthy dwelling place of the Greatod," he added, and closed his eyes.
	"I ought to tell you that I do not believe... do not believe in God,aid Pierre, regretfully and with an effort, feeling it essential topeak the whole truth.
	The Mason looked intently at Pierre and smiled as a rich man withillions in hand might smile at a poor fellow who told him that he,oor man, had not the five rubles that would make him happy.
	"Yes, you do not know Him, my dear sir," said the Mason. "You cannotnow Him. You do not know Him and that is why you are unhappy."
	"Yes, yes, I am unhappy," assented Pierre. "But what am I to do?"
	"You know Him not, my dear sir, and so you are very unhappy. Youo not know Him, but He is here, He is in me, He is in my words, He isn thee, and even in those blasphemous words thou hast justttered!" pronounced the Mason in a stern and tremulous voice.
	He paused and sighed, evidently trying to calm himself.
	"If He were not," he said quietly, "you and I would not bepeaking of Him, my dear sir. Of what, of whom, are we speaking?hom hast thou denied?" he suddenly asked with exulting austeritynd authority in his voice. "Who invented Him, if He did not exist?hence came thy conception of the existence of such anncomprehensible Being? didst thou, and why did the whole world,onceive the idea of the existence of such an incomprehensibleeing, a Being all-powerful, eternal, and infinite in all Histtributes?..."
	He stopped and remained silent for a long time.
	Pierre could not and did not wish to break this silence.
	"He exists, but to understand Him is hard," the Mason began again,ooking not at Pierre but straight before him, and turning theeaves of his book with his old hands which from excitement he couldot keep still. "If it were a man whose existence thou didst doubt Iould bring him to thee, could take him by the hand and show him tohee. But how can I, an insignificant mortal, show His omnipotence,is infinity, and all His mercy to one who is blind, or who shutsis eyes that he may not see or understand Him and may not see ornderstand his own vileness and sinfulness?" He paused again. "Who arthou? Thou dreamest that thou art wise because thou couldst utterhose blasphemous words," he went on, with a somber and scornfulmile. "And thou art more foolish and unreasonable than a littlehild, who, playing with the parts of a skillfully made watch, dareso say that, as he does not understand its use, he does not believe inhe master who made it. To know Him is hard.... For ages, from ourorefather Adam to our own day, we labor to attain that knowledgend are still infinitely far from our aim; but in our lack ofnderstanding we see only our weakness and His greatness...."
	Pierre listened with swelling heart, gazing into the Mason's faceith shining eyes, not interrupting or questioning him, butelieving with his whole soul what the stranger said. Whether heccepted the wise reasoning contained in the Mason's words, orelieved as a child believes, in the speaker's tone of convictionnd earnestness, or the tremor of the speaker's voice- which sometimeslmost broke- or those brilliant aged eyes grown old in thisonviction, or the calm firmness and certainty of his vocation,hich radiated from his whole being (and which struck Pierrespecially by contrast with his own dejection and hopelessness)- atny rate, Pierre longed with his whole soul to believe and he didelieve, and felt a joyful sense of comfort, regeneration, andeturn to life.
	"He is not to be apprehended by reason, but by life," said theason.
	"I do not understand," said Pierre, feeling with dismay doubtseawakening. He was afraid of any want of clearness, any weakness,n the Mason's arguments; he dreaded not to be able to believe in him.I don't understand," he said, "how it is that the mind of manannot attain the knowledge of which you speak."
	The Mason smiled with his gentle fatherly smile.
	"The highest wisdom and truth are like the purest liquid we may wisho imbibe," he said. "Can I receive that pure liquid into an impureessel and judge of its purity? Only by the inner purification ofyself can I retain in some degree of purity the liquid I receive."
	"Yes, yes, that is so," said Pierre joyfully.
	"The highest wisdom is not founded on reason alone, not on thoseorldly sciences of physics, history, chemistry, and the like, intohich intellectual knowledge is divided. The highest wisdom is one.he highest wisdom has but one science- the science of the whole-he science explaining the whole creation and man's place in it. Toeceive that science it is necessary to purify and renew one's innerelf, and so before one can know, it is necessary to believe and toerfect one's self. And to attain this end, we have the light calledonscience that God has implanted in our souls."
	"Yes, yes," assented Pierre.
	"Look then at thy inner self with the eyes of the spirit, and askhyself whether thou art content with thyself. What hast thou attainedelying on reason only? What art thou? You are young, you are rich,ou are clever, you are well educated. And what have you done with allhese good gifts? Are you content with yourself and with your life?"
	"No, I hate my life," Pierre muttered, wincing.
	"Thou hatest it. Then change it, purify thyself; and as thou arturified, thou wilt gain wisdom. Look at your life, my dear sir. Howave you spent it? In riotous orgies and debauchery, receivingverything from society and giving nothing in return. You haveecome the possessor of wealth. How have you used it? What have youone for your neighbor? Have you ever thought of your tens ofhousands of slaves? Have you helped them physically and morally?o! You have profited by their toil to lead a profligate life. That ishat you have done. Have you chosen a post in which you might be ofervice to your neighbor? No! You have spent your life in idleness.hen you married, my dear sir- took on yourself responsibility for theuidance of a young woman; and what have you done? You have not helpeder to find the way of truth, my dear sir, but have thrust her into anbyss of deceit and misery. A man offended you and you shot him, andou say you do not know God and hate your life. There is nothingtrange in that, my dear sir!"
	After these words, the Mason, as if tired by his long discourse,gain leaned his arms on the back of the sofa and closed his eyes.ierre looked at that aged, stern, motionless, almost lifeless facend moved his lips without uttering a sound. He wished to say, "Yes, aile, idle, vicious life!" but dared not break the silence.
	The Mason cleared his throat huskily, as old men do, and calledis servant.
	"How about the horses?" he asked, without looking at Pierre.
	"The exchange horses have just come," answered the servant. "Willou not rest here?"
	"No, tell them to harness."
	"Can he really be going away leaving me alone without having told mell, and without promising to help me?" thought Pierre, rising withowncast head; and he began to pace the room, glancing occasionally athe Mason. "Yes, I never thought of it, but I have led aontemptible and profligate life, though I did not like it and did notant to," thought Pierre. "But this man knows the truth and, if heished to, could disclose it to me."
	Pierre wished to say this to the Mason, but did not dare to. Theraveler, having packed his things with his practiced hands, beganastening his coat. When he had finished, he turned to Bezukhov, andaid in a tone of indifferent politeness:
	"Where are you going to now, my dear sir?"
	"I?... I'm going to Petersburg," answered Pierre, in a childlike,esitating voice. "I thank you. I agree with all you have said. But doot suppose me to be so bad. With my whole soul I wish to be whatou would have me be, but I have never had help from anyone.... But its I, above all, who am to blame for everything. Help me, teach me,nd perhaps I may..."
	Pierre could not go on. He gulped and turned away.
	The Mason remained silent for a long time, evidently considering.
	"Help comes from God alone," he said, "but such measure of help asur Order can bestow it will render you, my dear sir. You are going toetersburg. Hand this to Count Willarski" (he took out his notebooknd wrote a few words on a large sheet of paper folded in four).Allow me to give you a piece of advice. When you reach the capital,irst of all devote some time to solitude and self-examination ando not resume your former way of life. And now I wish you a goodourney, my dear sir," he added, seeing that his servant hadntered... "and success."
	The traveler was Joseph Alexeevich Bazdeev, as Pierre saw from theostmaster's book. Bazdeev had been one of the best-known Freemasonsnd Martinists, even in Novikov's time. For a long while after head gone, Pierre did not go to bed or order horses but paced up andown the room, pondering over his vicious past, and with a rapturousense of beginning anew pictured to himself the blissful,rreproachable, virtuous future that seemed to him so easy. Iteemed to him that he had been vicious only because he had somehoworgotten how good it is to be virtuous. Not a trace of his formeroubts remained in his soul. He firmly believed in the possibilityf the brotherhood of men united in the aim of supporting onenother in the path of virtue, and that is how Freemasonry presentedtself to him.BK5|CH3
	CHAPTER III
	On reaching Petersburg Pierre did not let anyone know of hisrrival, he went nowhere and spent whole days in reading Thomas aempis, whose book had been sent him by someone unknown. One thinge continually realized as he read that book: the joy, hithertonknown to him, of believing in the possibility of attainingerfection, and in the possibility of active brotherly love among men,hich Joseph Alexeevich had revealed to him. A week after his arrival,he young Polish count, Willarski, whom Pierre had known slightly inetersburg society, came into his room one evening in the official anderemonious manner in which Dolokhov's second had called on him,nd, having closed the door behind him and satisfied himself thathere was nobody else in the room, addressed Pierre.
	"I have come to you with a message and an offer, Count," he saidithout sitting down. "A person of very high standing in ourrotherhood has made application for you to be received into our Orderefore the usual term and has proposed to me to be your sponsor. Ionsider it a sacred duty to fulfill that person's wishes. Do you wisho enter the Brotherhood of Freemasons under my sponsorship?"
	 The cold, austere tone of this man, whom he had almost alwaysefore met at balls, amiably smiling in the society of the mostrilliant women, surprised Pierre.
	"Yes, I do wish it," said he.
	Willarski bowed his head.
	"One more question, Count," he said, "which beg you to answer in allincerity- not as a future Mason but as an honest man: have youenounced your former convictions- do you believe in God?"
	Pierre considered.
	"Yes... yes, I believe in God," he said.
	"In that case..." began Willarski, but Pierre interrupted him.
	"Yes, I do believe in God," he repeated.
	"In that case we can go," said Willarski. "My carriage is at yourervice."
	Willarski was silent throughout the drive. To Pierre's inquiriess to what he must do and how he should answer, Willarski only repliedhat brothers more worthy than he would test him and that Pierre hadnly to tell the truth.
	Having entered the courtyard of a large house where the Lodge hadts headquarters, and having ascended a dark staircase, they entered amall well-lit anteroom where they took off their cloaks without theid of a servant. From there they passed into another room. A man intrange attire appeared at the door. Willarski, stepping toward him,aid something to him in French in an undertone and then went up to small wardrobe in which Pierre noticed garments such as he had nevereen before. Having taken a kerchief from the cupboard, Willarskiound Pierre's eyes with it and tied it in a knot behind, catchingome hairs painfully in the knot. Then he drew his face down, kissedim, and taking him by the hand led him forward. The hairs tied in thenot hurt Pierre and there were lines of pain on his face and ahamefaced smile. His huge figure, with arms hanging down and with auckered, though smiling face, moved after Willarski with uncertain,imid steps.
	Having led him about ten paces, Willarski stopped.
	"Whatever happens to you," he said, "you must bear it all manfullyf you have firmly resolved to join our Brotherhood." (Pierre noddedffirmatively.) "When you hear a knock at the door, you will uncoverour eyes," added Willarski. "I wish you courage and success," and,ressing Pierre's hand, he went out.
	Left alone, Pierre went on smiling in the same way. Once or twice hehrugged his and raised his hand to the kerchief, as if wishing toake it off, but let it drop again. The five minutes spent with hisyes bandaged seemed to him an hour. His arms felt numb, his legslmost gave way, it seemed to him that he was tired out. Hexperienced a variety of most complex sensations. He felt afraid ofhat would happen to him and still more afraid of showing his fear. Heelt curious to know what was going to happen and what would beevealed to him; but most of all, he felt joyful that the moment hadome when he would at last start on that path of regeneration and onhe actively virtuous life of which he had been dreaming since heet Joseph Alexeevich. Loud knocks were heard at the door. Pierre tookhe bandage off his eyes and glanced around him. The room was in blackarkness, only a small lamp was burning inside something white. Pierreent nearer and saw that the lamp stood on a black table on whichay an open book. The book was the Gospel, and the white thing withhe lamp inside was a human skull with its cavities and teeth. Aftereading the first words of the Gospel: "In the beginning was theord and the Word was with God," Pierre went round the table and saw aarge open box filled with something. It was a coffin with bonesnside. He was not at all surprised by what he saw. Hoping to enter onn entirely new life quite unlike the old one, he expectedverything to be unusual, even more unusual than what he was seeing. Akull, a coffin, the Gospel- it seemed to him that he had expected allhis and even more. Trying to stimulate his emotions he looked around.God, death, love, the brotherhood of man," he kept saying to himself,ssociating these words with vague yet joyful ideas. The door openednd someone came in.
	By the dim light, to which Pierre had already become accustomed,e saw rather short man. Having evidently come from the light into thearkness, the man paused, then moved with cautious steps toward theable and placed on it his small leather-gloved hands.
	This short man had on a white leather apron which covered hishest and part of his legs; he had on a kind of necklace above whichose a high white ruffle, outlining his rather long face which was litp from below.
	"For what have you come hither?" asked the newcomer, turning inierre's direction at a slight rustle made by the latter. "Why haveou, who do not believe in the truth of the light and who have noteen the light, come here? What do you seek from us? Wisdom, virtue,nlightenment?"
	At the moment the door opened and the stranger came in, Pierreelt a sense of awe and veneration such as he had experienced in hisoyhood at confession; he felt himself in the presence of one socially complete stranger, yet nearer to him through the brotherhood of man.ith bated breath and beating heart he moved toward the Rhetor (byhich name the brother who prepared a seeker for entrance into therotherhood was known). Drawing nearer, he recognized in the Rhetor man he knew, Smolyaninov, and it mortified him to think that theewcomer was an acquaintance- he wished him simply a brother and airtuous instructor. For a long time he could not utter a word, sohat the Rhetor had to repeat his question.
	"Yes... I... I... desire regeneration," Pierre uttered withifficulty.
	"Very well," said Smolyaninov, and went on at once: "Have you anydea of the means by which our holy Order will help you to reachour aim?" said he quietly and quickly.
	"I... hope... for guidance... help... in regeneration," said Pierre,ith a trembling voice and some difficulty in utterance due to hisxcitement and to being unaccustomed to speak of abstract matters inussian.
	"What is your conception of Freemasonry?"
	"I imagine that Freemasonry is the fraternity and equality of menho have virtuous aims," said Pierre, feeling ashamed of thenadequacy of his words for the solemnity of the moment, as hepoke. "I imagine..."
	"Good!" said the Rhetor quickly, apparently satisfied with thisnswer. "Have you sought for means of attaining your aim in religion?"
	"No, I considered it erroneous and did not follow it," saidierre, so softly that the Rhetor did not hear him and asked himhat he was saying. "I have been an atheist," answered Pierre.
	"You are seeking for truth in order to follow its laws in your life,herefore you seek wisdom and virtue. Is that not so?" said thehetor, after a moment's pause.
	"Yes, yes," assented Pierre.
	The Rhetor cleared his throat, crossed his gloved hands on hisreast, and began to speak.
	"Now I must disclose to you the chief aim of our Order," he said,and if this aim coincides with yours, you may enter our Brotherhoodith profit. The first and chief object of our Order, the foundationn which it rests and which no human power can destroy, is thereservation and handing on to posterity of a certain importantystery... which has come down to us from the remotest ages, even fromhe first man- a mystery on which perhaps the fate of mankind depends.ut since this mystery is of such a nature that nobody can know or uset unless he be prepared by long and diligent self-purification, notveryone can hope to attain it quickly. Hence we have a secondary aim,hat of preparing our members as much as possible to reform theirearts, to purify and enlighten their minds, by means handed on tos by tradition from those who have striven to attain this mystery,nd thereby to render them capable of receiving it.
	"By purifying and regenerating our members we try, thirdly, tomprove the whole human race, offering it in our members an example ofiety and virtue, and thereby try with all our might to combat thevil which sways the world. Think this over and I will come to yougain."
	"To combat the evil which sways the world..." Pierre repeated, and aental image of his future activity in this direction rose in hisind. He imagined men such as he had himself been a fortnight ago, ande addressed an edifying exhortation to them. He imagined to himselficious and unfortunate people whom he would assist by word andeed, imagined oppressors whose victims he would rescue. Of thehree objects mentioned by the Rhetor, this last, that of improvingankind, especially appealed to Pierre. The important mysteryentioned by the Rhetor, though it aroused his curiosity, did not seemo him essential, and the second aim, that of purifying andegenerating himself, did not much interest him because at that momente felt with delight that he was already perfectly cured of his formeraults and was ready for all that was good.
	Half an hour later, the Rhetor returned to inform the seeker ofhe seven virtues, corresponding to the seven steps of Solomon'semple, which every Freemason should cultivate in himself. Theseirtues were:  1. Discretion, the keeping of the secrets of the Order.2. Obedience to those of higher ranks in the Order.  3. Morality.  4.ove of mankind.  5. Courage.  6. Generosity.  7. The love of death.
	"In the seventh place, try, by the frequent thought of death," thehetor said, "to bring yourself to regard it not as a dreaded foe, buts a friend that frees the soul grown weary in the labors of virtuerom this distressful life, and leads it to its place of recompensend peace."
	"Yes, that must be so," thought Pierre, when after these words thehetor went away, leaving him to solitary meditation. "It must beo, but I am still so weak that I love my life, the meaning of whichs only now gradually opening before me." But five of the otherirtues which Pierre recalled, counting them on his fingers, he feltlready in his soul: courage, generosity, morality, love of mankind,nd especially obedience- which did not even seem to him a virtue, but joy. (He now felt so glad to be free from his own lawlessness and toubmit his will to those who knew the indubitable truth.) He forgothat the seventh virtue was and could not recall it.
	The third time the Rhetor came back more quickly and asked Pierrehether he was still firm in his intention and determined to submit toll that would be required of him.
	"I am ready for everything," said Pierre.
	"I must also inform you," said the Rhetor, "that our Orderelivers its teaching not in words only but also by other means, whichay perhaps have a stronger effect on the sincere seeker afterisdom and virtue than mere words. This chamber with what you seeherein should already have suggested to your heart, if it is sincere,ore than words could do. You will perhaps also see in your furthernitiation a like method of enlightenment. Our Order imitates thencient societies that explained their teaching by hieroglyphics. Aieroglyph," said the Rhetor, "is an emblem of something notognizable by the senses but which possesses qualities resemblinghose of the symbol."
	Pierre knew very well what a hieroglyph was, but dared not speak. Heistened to the Rhetor in silence, feeling from all he said that hisrdeal was about to begin.
	"If you are resolved, I must begin your initiation," said the Rhetoroming closer to Pierre. "In token of generosity I ask you to givee all your valuables."
	"But I have nothing here," replied Pierre, supposing that he wassked to give up all he possessed.
	"What you have with you: watch, money, rings...."
	Pierre quickly took out his purse and watch, but could not manageor some time to get the wedding ring off his fat finger. When thatad been done, the Rhetor said:
	"In token of obedience, I ask you to undress."
	Pierre took off his coat, waistcoat, and left boot according tohe Rhetor's instructions. The Mason drew the shirt back from Pierre'seft breast, and stooping down pulled up the left leg of hisrousers to above the knee. Pierre hurriedly began taking off hisight boot also and was going to tuck up the other trouser leg to savehis stranger the trouble, but the Mason told him that was notecessary and gave him a slipper for his left foot. With a childlikemile of embarrassment, doubt, and self-derision, which appeared onis face against his will, Pierre stood with his arms hanging down andegs apart, before his brother Rhetor, and awaited his furtherommands.
	"And now, in token of candor, I ask you to reveal to me your chiefassion," said the latter.
	"My passion! I have had so many," replied Pierre.
	"That passion which more than all others caused you to waver onhe path of virtue," said the Mason.
	Pierre paused, seeking a reply.
	"Wine? Gluttony? Idleness? Laziness? Irritability? Anger? Women?" Heent over his vices in his mind, not knowing to which of them toive the pre-eminence.
	"Women," he said in a low, scarcely audible voice.
	The Mason did not move and for a long time said nothing after thisnswer. At last he moved up to Pierre and, taking the kerchief thatay on the table, again bound his eyes.
	"For the last time I say to you- turn all your attention uponourself, put a bridle on your senses, and seek blessedness, not inassion but in your own heart. The source of blessedness is notithout us but within...."
	Pierre had already long been feeling in himself that refreshingource of blessedness which now flooded his heart with glad emotion.BK5|CH4
	CHAPTER IV
	Soon after this there came into the dark chamber to fetch Pierre,ot the Rhetor but Pierre's sponsor, Willarski, whom he recognizedy his voice. To fresh questions as to the firmness of hisesolution Pierre replied: "Yes, yes, I agree," and with a beaming,hildlike smile, his fat chest uncovered, stepping unevenly andimidly in one slippered and one booted foot, he advanced, whileillarski held a sword to his bare chest. He was conducted from thatoom along passages that turned backwards and forwards and was at lastrought to the doors of the Lodge. Willarski coughed, he wasnswered by the Masonic knock with mallets, the doors opened beforehem. A bass voice (Pierre was still blindfold) questioned him as toho he was, when and where he was born, and so on. Then he was agained somewhere still blindfold, and as they went along he was toldllegories of the toils of his pilgrimage, of holy friendship, ofhe Eternal Architect of the universe, and of the courage with whiche should endure toils and dangers. During these wanderings, Pierreoticed that he was spoken of now as the "Seeker," now as theSufferer," and now as the "Postulant," to the accompaniment ofarious knockings with mallets and swords. As he was being led up toome object he noticed a hesitation and uncertainty among hisonductors. He heard those around him disputing in whispers and one ofhem insisting that he should be led along a certain carpet. Afterhat they took his right hand, placed it on something, and told him toold a pair of compasses to his left breast with the other hand and toepeat after someone who read aloud an oath of fidelity to the laws ofhe Order. The candles were then extinguished and some spirit lighted,s Pierre knew by the smell, and he was told that he would now see theesser light. The bandage was taken off his eyes and, by the faintight of the burning spirit, Pierre, as in a dream, saw several mentanding before him, wearing aprons like the Rhetor's and holdingwords in their hands pointed at his breast. Among them stood a manhose white shirt was stained with blood. On seeing this, Pierre movedorward with his breast toward the swords, meaning them to piercet. But the swords were drawn back from him and he was at oncelindfolded again.
	"Now thou hast seen the lesser light," uttered a voice. Then theandles were relit and he was told that he would see the full light;he bandage was again removed and more than ten voices saidogether: "Sic transit gloria mundi."
	Pierre gradually began to recover himself and looked about at theoom and at the people in it. Round a long table covered with blackat some twelve men in garments like those he had already seen. Somef them Pierre had met in Petersburg society. In the President's chairat a young man he did not know, with a peculiar cross hanging fromis neck. On his right sat the Italian abbe whom Pierre had met atnna Pavlovna's two years before. There were also present a veryistinguished dignitary and a Swiss who had formerly been tutor at theuragins'. All maintained a solemn silence, listening to the wordsf the President, who held a mallet in his hand. Let into the wall was star-shaped light. At one side of the table was a small carpetith various figures worked upon it, at the other was somethingesembling an altar on which lay a Testament and a skull. Round ittood seven large candlesticks like those used in churches. Two of therothers led Pierre up to the altar, placed his feet at rightngles, and bade him lie down, saying that he must prostrate himselft the Gates of the Temple.
	"He must first receive the trowel," whispered one of the brothers.
	"Oh, hush, please!" said another.
	Pierre, perplexed, looked round with his shortsighted eyes withoutbeying, and suddenly doubts arose in his mind. "Where am I? What am Ioing? Aren't they laughing at me? Shan't I be ashamed to rememberhis?" But these doubts only lasted a moment. Pierre glanced at theerious faces of those around, remembered all he had already gonehrough, and realized that he could not stop halfway. He was aghast atis hesitation and, trying to arouse his former devotional feeling,rostrated himself before the Gates of the Temple. And really, theeeling of devotion returned to him even more strongly than before.hen he had lain there some time, he was told to get up, and a whiteeather apron, such as the others wore, was put on him: he was given arowel and three pairs of gloves, and then the Grand Masterddressed him. He told him that he should try to do nothing to stainhe whiteness of that apron, which symbolized strength and purity;hen of the unexplained trowel, he told him to toil with it to cleanseis own heart from vice, and indulgently to smooth with it the heartf his neighbor. As to the first pair of gloves, a man's, he said thatierre could not know their meaning but must keep them. The secondair of man's gloves he was to wear at the meetings, and finally ofhe third, a pair of women's gloves, he said: "Dear brother, theseoman's gloves are intended for you too. Give them to the woman whomou shall honor most of all. This gift will be a pledge of your purityf heart to her whom you select to be your worthy helpmeet inasonry." And after a pause, he added: "But beware, dear brother, thathese gloves do not deck hands that are unclean." While the Grandaster said these last words it seemed to Pierre that he grewmbarrassed. Pierre himself grew still more confused, blushed like ahild till tears came to his eyes, began looking about him uneasily,nd an awkward pause followed.
	This silence was broken by one of the brethren, who led Pierre up tohe rug and began reading to him from a manuscript book an explanationf all the figures on it: the sun, the moon, a hammer, a plumb line, arowel, a rough stone and a squared stone, a pillar, three windows,nd so on. Then a place was assigned to Pierre, he was shown the signsf the Lodge, told the password, and at last was permitted to sitown. The Grand Master began reading the statutes. They were veryong, and Pierre, from joy, agitation, and embarrassment, was not in atate to understand what was being read. He managed to follow only theast words of the statutes and these remained in his mind.
	"In our temples we recognize no other distinctions," read therand Master, "but those between virtue and vice. Beware of making anyistinctions which may infringe equality. Fly to a brother's aidhoever he may be, exhort him who goeth astray, raise him thatalleth, never bear malice or enmity toward thy brother. Be kindly andourteous. Kindle in all hearts the flame of virtue. Share thyappiness with thy neighbor, and may envy never dim the purity of thatliss. Forgive thy enemy, do not avenge thyself except by doing himood. Thus fulfilling the highest law thou shalt regain traces ofhe ancient dignity which thou hast lost."
	He finished and, getting up, embraced and kissed Pierre, who, withears of joy in his eyes, looked round him, not knowing how tonswer the congratulations and greetings from acquaintances that metim on all sides. He acknowledged no acquaintances but saw in allhese men only brothers, and burned with impatience to set to workith them.
	The Grand Master rapped with his mallet. All the Masons sat downn their places, and one of them read an exhortation on theecessity of humility.
	The Grand Master proposed that the last duty should be performed,nd the distinguished dignitary who bore the title of "Collector oflms" went round to all the brothers. Pierre would have liked toubscribe all he had, but fearing that it might look like prideubscribed the same amount as the others.
	The meeting was at an end, and on reaching home Pierre felt as if head returned from a long journey on which he had spent dozens ofears, had become completely changed, and had quite left behind hisormer habits and way of life.BK5|CH5
	CHAPTER V
	The day after he had been received into the Lodge, Pierre wasitting at home reading a book and trying to fathom the significancef the Square, one side of which symbolized God, another moral things, third physical things, and the fourth a combination of these. Nownd then his attention wandered from the book and the Square and heormed in imagination a new plan of life. On the previous evening athe Lodge, he had heard that a rumor of his duel had reached themperor and that it would be wiser for him to leave Petersburg. Pierreroposed going to his estates in the south and there attending tohe welfare of his serfs. He was joyfully planning this new life, whenrince Vasili suddenly entered the room.
	"My dear fellow, what have you been up to in Moscow? Why have youuarreled with Helene, mon cher? You are under a delusion," saidrince Vasili, as he entered. "I know all about it, and I can tell youositively that Helene is as innocent before you as Christ wasefore the Jews."
	Pierre was about to reply, but Prince Vasili interrupted him.
	"And why didn't you simply come straight to me as to a friend? Inow all about it and understand it all," he said. "You behaved asecomes a man values his honor, perhaps too hastily, but we won't gonto that. But consider the position in which you are placing hernd me in the eyes of society, and even of the court," he added,owering his voice. "She is living in Moscow and you are here.emember, dear boy," and he drew Pierre's arm downwards, "it is simply misunderstanding. I expect you feel it so yourself. Let us write her letter at once, and she'll come here and all will be explained, orlse, my dear boy, let me tell you it's quite likely you'll have touffer for it."
	Prince Vasili gave Pierre a significant look.
	"I know from reliable sources that the Dowager Empress is taking aeen interest in the whole affair. You know she is very gracious toelene."
	Pierre tried several times to speak, but, on one hand, Prince Vasiliid not let him and, on the other, Pierre himself feared to begin topeak in the tone of decided refusal and disagreement in which head firmly resolved to answer his father-in-law. Moreover, the wordsf the Masonic statutes, "be kindly and courteous," recurred to him.e blinked, went red, got up and sat down again, struggling withimself to do what was for him the most difficult thing in life- toay an unpleasant thing to a man's face, to say what the other,hoever he might be, did not expect. He was so used to submitting torince Vasili's tone of careless self-assurance that he felt heould be unable to withstand it now, but he also felt that on whate said now his future depended- whether he would follow the sameld road, or that new path so attractively shown him by the Masons, onhich he firmly believed he would be reborn to a new life.
	"Now, dear boy," said Prince Vasili playfully, "say 'yes,' and'll write to her myself, and we will kill the fatted calf."
	But before Prince Vasili had finished his playful speech, Pierre,ithout looking at him, and with a kind of fury that made him like hisather, muttered in a whisper:
	"Prince, I did not ask you here. Go, please go!" And he jumped upnd opened the door for him.
	"Go!" he repeated, amazed at himself and glad to see the look ofonfusion and fear that showed itself on Prince Vasili's face.
	"What's the matter with you? Are you ill?"
	"Go!" the quivering voice repeated. And Prince Vasili had to goithout receiving any explanation.
	A week later, Pierre, having taken leave of his new friends, theasons, and leaving large sums of money with them for alms, wentway to his estates. His new brethren gave him letters to the Kiev anddessa Masons and promised to write to him and guide him in his newctivity.BK5|CH6
	CHAPTER VI
	The duel between Pierre and Dolokhov was hushed up and, in spitef the Emperor's severity regarding duels at that time, neither therincipals nor their seconds suffered for it. But the story of theuel, confirmed by Pierre's rupture with his wife, was the talk ofociety. Pierre who had been regarded with patronizing condescensionhen he was an illegitimate son, and petted and extolled when he washe best match in Russia, had sunk greatly in the esteem of societyfter his marriage- when the marriageable daughters and theirothers had nothing to hope from him- especially as he did not knowow, and did not wish, to court society's favor. Now he alone waslamed for what had happened, he was said to be insanely jealous andubject like his father to fits of bloodthirsty rage. And when afterierre's departure Helene returned to Petersburg, she was receivedy all her acquaintances not only cordially, but even with a shadef deference due to her misfortune. When conversation turned on herusband Helene assumed a dignified expression, which withharacteristic tact she had acquired though she did not understand itsignificance. This expression suggested that she had resolved tondure her troubles uncomplainingly and that her husband was a crossaid upon her by God. Prince Vasili expressed his opinion more openly.e shrugged his shoulders when Pierre was mentioned and, pointing tois forehead, remarked:
	"A bit touched- I always said so."
	"I said from the first," declared Anna Pavlovna referring to Pierre,I said at the time and before anyone else" (she insisted on herriority) "that that senseless young man was spoiled by the depraveddeas of these days. I said so even at the time when everybody wasn raptures about him, when he had just returned from abroad, andhen, if you remember, he posed as a sort of Marat at one of myoirees. And how has it ended? I was against this marriage even thennd foretold all that has happened."
	Anna Pavlovna continued to give on free evenings the same kind ofoirees as before- such as she alone had the gift of arranging- athich was to be found "the cream of really good society, the bloomf the intellectual essence of Petersburg," as she herself put it.esides this refined selection of society Anna Pavlovna's receptionsere also distinguished by the fact that she always presented some newnd interesting person to the visitors and that nowhere else was thetate of the political thermometer of legitimate Petersburg courtociety so dearly and distinctly indicated.
	Toward the end of 1806, when all the sad details of Napoleon'sestruction of the Prussian army at Jena and Auerstadt and theurrender of most of the Prussian fortresses had been received, whenur troops had already entered Prussia and our second war withapoleon was beginning, Anna Pavlovna gave one of her soirees. Thecream of really good society" consisted of the fascinating Helene,orsaken by her husband, Mortemart, the delightful Prince Hippolyteho had just returned from Vienna, two diplomatists, the old aunt, aoung man referred to in that drawing room as "a man of great merit"un homme de beaucoup de merite), a newly appointed maid of honornd her mother, and several other less noteworthy persons.
	The novelty Anna Pavlovna was setting before her guests that eveningas Boris Drubetskoy, who had just arrived as a special messenger fromhe Prussian army and was aide-de-camp to a very important personage.
	The temperature shown by the political thermometer to the companyhat evening was this:
	"Whatever the European sovereigns and commanders may do toountenance Bonaparte, and to cause me, and us in general, annoyancend mortification, our opinion of Bonaparte cannot alter. We shall notease to express our sincere views on that subject, and can only sayo the King Prussia and others: 'So much the worse for you. Tu l'asoulu, George Dandin,' that's all we have to say about it!"
	When Boris, who was to be served up to the guests, entered therawing room, almost all the company had assembled, and theonversation, guided by Anna Pavlovna, was about our diplomaticelations with Austria and the hope of an alliance with her.
	Boris, grown more manly and looking fresh, rosy andelf-possessed, entered the drawing room elegantly dressed in theniform of an aide-de-camp and was duly conducted to pay hisespects to the aunt and then brought back to the general circle.
	Anna Pavlovna gave him her shriveled hand to kiss and introduced himo several persons whom he did not know, giving him a whisperedescription of each.
	"Prince Hippolyte Kuragin _________ charming young fellow; M. Kronq-harge d'affaires from Copenhagen- a profound intellect," andimply, "Mr. Shitov- a man of great merit"- this of the man usually soescribed.
	Thanks to Anna Mikhaylovna's efforts, his own tastes, and theeculiarities of his reserved nature, Boris had managed during hiservice to place himself very advantageously. He was aide-de-camp to aery important personage, had been sent on a very important mission torussia, and had just returned from there as a special messenger. Head become thoroughly conversant with that unwritten code with whiche had been so pleased at Olmutz and according to which an ensignight rank incomparably higher than a general, and according tohich what was needed for success in the service was not effort orork, or courage, or perseverance, but only the knowledge of how toet on with those who can grant rewards, and he was himself oftenurprised at the rapidity of his success and at the inability ofthers to understand these things. In consequence of this discoveryis whole manner of life, all his relations with old friends, allis plans for his future, were completely altered. He was not rich,ut would spend his last groat to be better dressed than others, andould rather deprive himself of many pleasures than allow himself toe seen in a shabby equipage or appear in the streets of Petersburg inn old uniform. He made friends with and sought the acquaintance ofnly those above him in position and who could therefore be of useo him. He liked Petersburg and despised Moscow. The remembrance ofhe Rostovs' house and of his childish love for Natasha was unpleasanto him and he had not once been to see the Rostovs since the day ofis departure for the army. To be in Anna Pavlovna's drawing room heonsidered an important step up in the service, and he at oncenderstood his role, letting his hostess make use of whatever intereste had to offer. He himself carefully scanned each face, appraisinghe possibilities of establishing intimacy with each of those present,nd the advantages that might accrue. He took the seat indicated toim beside the fair Helene and listened to the general conversation.
	"Vienna considers the bases of the proposed treaty so unattainablehat not even a continuity of most brilliant successes would securehem, and she doubts the means we have of gaining them. That is thectual phrase used by the Vienna cabinet," said the Danish charge'affaires.
	"The doubt is flattering," said "the man of profound intellect,"ith a subtle smile.
	"We must distinguish between the Vienna cabinet and the Emperor ofustria," said Mortemart. "The Emperor of Austria can never havehought of such a thing, it is only the cabinet that says it."
	"Ah, my dear vicomte," put in Anna Pavlovna, "L'Urope" (for someeason she called it Urope as if that were a specially refinedrench pronunciation which she could allow herself when conversingith a Frenchman), "L'Urope ne sera jamais notre alliee sincere."*
	*"Europe will never be our sincere ally."
	After that Anna Pavlovna led up to the courage and firmness of theing of Prussia, in order to draw Boris into the conversation.
	Boris listened attentively to each of the speakers, awaiting hisurn, but managed meanwhile to look round repeatedly at hiseighbor, the beautiful Helene, whose eyes several times met thosef the handsome young aide-de-camp with a smile.
	Speaking of the position of Prussia, Anna Pavlovna very naturallysked Boris to tell them about his journey to Glogau and in what statee found the Prussian army. Boris, speaking with deliberation, toldhem in pure, correct French many interesting details about the armiesnd the court, carefully abstaining from expressing an opinion ofis own about the facts he was recounting. For some time hengrossed the general attention, and Anna Pavlovna felt that theovelty she had served up was received with pleasure by all herisitors. The greatest attention of all to Boris' narrative washown by Helene. She asked him several questions about his journey andeemed greatly interested in the state of the Prussian army. As soons he had finished she turned to him with her usual smile.
	"You absolutely must come and see me," she said in a tone thatmplied that, for certain considerations he could not know of, thisas absolutely necessary.
	"On Tuesday between eight and nine. It will give me great pleasure."
	Boris promised to fulfill her wish and was about to begin aonversation with her, when Anna Pavlovna called him away on theretext that her aunt wished to hear him.
	"You know her husband, of course?" said Anna Pavlovna, closing heryes and indicating Helene with a sorrowful gesture. "Ah, she isuch an unfortunate and charming woman! Don't mention him beforeer- please don't! It is too painful for her!"BK5|CH7
	CHAPTER VII
	When Boris and Anna Pavlovna returned to the others Prince Hippolytead the ear of the company.
	Bending forward in his armchair he said: "Le Roi de Prusse!" andaving said this laughed. Everyone turned toward him.
	"Le Roi de Prusse?" Hippolyte said interrogatively, againaughing, and then calmly and seriously sat back in his chair. Annaavlovna waited for him to go on, but as he seemed quite decided toay no more she began to tell of how at Potsdam the impiousonaparte had stolen the sword of Frederick the Great.
	"It is the sword of Frederick the Great which I..." she began, butippolyte interrupted her with the words: "Le Roi de Prusse..." andgain, as soon as soon as all turned toward him, excused himself andaid no more.
	Anna Pavlovna frowned. Mortemart, Hippolyte's friend, addressedim firmly.
	"Come now, what about your Roi de Prusse?"
	Hippolyte laughed as if ashamed of laughing.
	"Oh, it's nothing. I only wished to say..." (he wanted to repeat aoke he had heard in Vienna and which he had been trying all thatvening to get in) "I only wished to say that we are wrong to fightour le Roi de Prusse!"
	Boris smiled circumspectly, so that it might be taken as ironical orppreciative according to the way the joke was received. Everybodyaughed.
	"Your joke is too bad, it's witty but unjust," said Anna Pavlovna,haking her little shriveled finger at him.
	"We are not fighting pour le Roi de Prusse, but for rightrinciples. Oh, that wicked Prince Hippolyte!" she said.
	The conversation did not flag all evening and turned chiefly onhe political news. It became particularly animated toward the endf the evening when the rewards bestowed by the Emperor wereentioned.
	"You know N- N- received a snuffbox with the portrait last year?"aid "the man of profound intellect." "Why shouldn't S- S- get theame distinction?"
	"Pardon me! A snuffbox with the Emperor's portrait is a reward butot a distinction," said the diplomatist- "a gift, rather."
	"There are precedents, I may mention Schwarzenberg."
	"It's impossible," replied another.
	"Will you bet? The ribbon of the order is a different matter...."
	When everybody rose to go, Helene who had spoken very little all thevening again turned to Boris, asking him in a tone of caressingignificant command to come to her on Tuesday.
	"It is of great importance to me," she said, turning with a smileoward Anna Pavlovna, and Anna Pavlovna, with the same sad smileith which she spoke of her exalted patroness, supported Helene'sish.
	It seemed as if from some words Boris had spoken that eveningbout the Prussian army, Helene had suddenly found it necessary to seeim. She seemed to promise to explain that necessity to him when heame on Tuesday.
	But on Tuesday evening, having come to Helene's splendid salon,oris received no clear explanation of why it had been necessary forim to come. There were other guests and the countess talked little toim, and only as he kissed her hand on taking leave saidnexpectedly and in a whisper, with a strangely unsmiling face:Come to dinner tomorrow... in the evening. You must come.... Come!"
	During that stay in Petersburg, Boris became an intimate in theountess' house.BK5|CH8
	CHAPTER VIII
	The war was flaming up and nearing the Russian frontier.verywhere one heard curses on Bonaparte, "the enemy of mankind."ilitiamen and recruits were being enrolled in the villages, androm the seat of war came contradictory news, false as usual andherefore variously interpreted. The life of old Prince Bolkonski,rince Andrew, and Princess Mary had greatly changed since 1805.
	In 1806 the old prince was made one of the eight commanders in chiefhen appointed to supervise the enrollment decreed throughoutussia. Despite the weakness of age, which had become particularlyoticeable since the time when he thought his son had been killed,e did not think it right to refuse a duty to which he had beenppointed by the Emperor himself, and this fresh opportunity forction gave him new energy and strength. He was continuallyraveling through the three provinces entrusted to him, was pedanticn the fulfillment of his duties, severe to cruelty with hisubordinates, and went into everything down to the minutest detailsimself. Princess Mary had ceased taking lessons in mathematics fromer father, and when the old prince was at home went to his study withhe wet nurse and little Prince Nicholas (as his grandfather calledim). The baby Prince Nicholas lived with his wet nurse and nurseavishna in the late princess' rooms and Princess Mary spent most ofhe day in the nursery, taking a mother's place to her little nephews best she could. Mademoiselle Bourienne, too, seemed passionatelyond of the boy, and Princess Mary often deprived herself to giveer friend the pleasure of dandling the little angel- as she calleder nephew- and playing with him.
	Near the altar of the church at Bald Hills there was a chapel overhe tomb of the little princess, and in this chapel was a marbleonument brought from Italy, representing an angel with outspreadings ready to fly upwards. The angel's upper lip was slightlyaised as though about to smile, and once on coming out of thehapel Prince Andrew and Princess Mary admitted to one another thathe angel's face reminded them strangely of the little princess. Buthat was still stranger, though of this Prince Andrew said nothingo his sister, was that in the expression the sculptor had happened toive the angel's face, Prince Andrew read the same mild reproach head read on the face of his dead wife: "Ah, why have you done thiso me?"
	Soon after Prince Andrew's return the old prince made over to him large estate, Bogucharovo, about twenty-five miles from Baldills. Partly because of the depressing memories associated withald Hills, partly because Prince Andrew did not always feel equalo bearing with his father's peculiarities, and partly because heeeded solitude, Prince Andrew made use of Bogucharovo, began buildingnd spent most of his time there.
	After the Austerlitz campaign Prince Andrew had firmly resolvedot to continue his military service, and when the war recommenced andverybody had to serve, he took a post under his father in theecruitment so as to avoid active service. The old prince and hison seemed to have changed roles since the campaign of 1805. The oldan, roused by activity, expected the best results from the newampaign, while Prince Andrew on the contrary, taking no part in thear and secretly regretting this, saw only the dark side.
	On February 26, 1807, the old prince set off on one of his circuits.rince Andrew remained at Bald Hills as usual during his father'sbsence. Little Nicholas had been unwell for four days. The coachmanho had driven the old prince to town returned bringing papers andetters for Prince Andrew.
	Not finding the young prince in his study the valet went with theetters to Princess Mary's apartments, but did not find him there.e was told that the prince had gone to the nursery.
	"If you please, your excellency, Petrusha has brought someapers," said one of the nursemaids to Prince Andrew who was sittingn a child's little chair while, frowning and with trembling hands, heoured drops from a medicine bottle into a wineglass half full ofater.
	"What is it?" he said crossly, and, his hand shakingnintentionally, he poured too many drops into the glass. He threw theixture onto the floor and asked for some more water. The maid broughtt.
	There were in the room a child's cot, two boxes, two armchairs, aable, a child's table, and the little chair on which Prince Andrewas sitting. The curtains were drawn, and a single candle wasurning on the table, screened by a bound music book so that the lightid not fall on the cot.
	"My dear," said Princess Mary, addressing her brother from besidehe cot where she was standing, "better wait a bit... later..."
	"Oh, leave off, you always talk nonsense and keep putting thingsff- and this is what comes of it!" said Prince Andrew in anxasperated whisper, evidently meaning to wound his sister.
	"My dear, really... it's better not to wake him... he's asleep,"aid the princess in a tone of entreaty.
	Prince Andrew got up and went on tiptoe up to the little bed,ineglass in hand.
	"Perhaps we'd really better not wake him," he said hesitating.
	"As you please... really... I think so... but as you please," saidrincess Mary, evidently intimidated and confused that her opinion hadrevailed. She drew her brother's attention to the maid who wasalling him in a whisper.
	It was the second night that neither of them had slept, watching theoy who was in a high fever. These last days, mistrusting theirousehold doctor and expecting another for whom they had sent to town,hey had been trying first one remedy and then another. Worn out byleeplessness and anxiety they threw their burden of sorrow on onenother and reproached and disputed with each other.
	"Petrusha has come with papers from your father," whispered theaid.
	Prince Andrew went out.
	"Devil take them!" he muttered, and after listening to the verbalnstructions his father had sent and taking the correspondence and hisather's letter, he returned to the nursery.
	"Well?" he asked.
	"Still the same. Wait, for heaven's sake. Karl Ivanich always sayshat sleep is more important than anything," whispered Princess Maryith a sigh.
	Prince Andrew went up to the child and felt him. He was burning hot.
	"Confound you and your Karl Ivanich!" He took the glass with therops and again went up to the cot.
	"Andrew, don't!" said Princess Mary.
	But he scowled at her angrily though also with suffering in hisyes, and stooped glass in hand over the infant.
	"But I wish it," he said. "I beg you- give it him!"
	Princess Mary shrugged her shoulders but took the glass submissivelynd calling the nurse began giving the medicine. The child screamedoarsely. Prince Andrew winced and, clutching his head, went out andat down on a sofa in the next room.
	He still had all the letters in his hand. Opening themechanically he began reading. The old prince, now and then usingbbreviations, wrote in his large elongated hand on blue paper asollows:
	Have just this moment received by special messenger very joyfulews- if it's not false. Bennigsen seems to have obtained a completeictory over Buonaparte at Eylau. In Petersburg everyone is rejoicing,nd the rewards sent to the army are innumerable. Though he is aerman- I congratulate him! I can't make out what the commander atorchevo- a certain Khandrikov- is up to; till now the additionalen and provisions have not arrived. Gallop off to him at once and say'll have his head off if everything is not here in a week. Haveeceived another letter about the Preussisch-Eylau battle frometenka- he took part in it- and it's all true. When mischief-makerson't meddle even a German beats Buonaparte. He is said to beleeing in great disorder. Mind you gallop off to Korchevo withoutelay and carry out instructions!
	Prince Andrew sighed and broke the seal of another envelope. Itas a closely written letter of two sheets from Bilibin. He foldedt up without reading it and reread his father's letter, ending withhe words: "Gallop off to Korchevo and carry out instructions!"
	"No, pardon me, I won't go now till the child is better," thoughte, going to the door and looking into the nursery.
	Princess Mary was still standing by the cot, gently rocking theaby.
	"Ah yes, and what else did he say that's unpleasant?" thought Princendrew, recalling his father's letter. "Yes, we have gained aictory over Bonaparte, just when I'm not serving. Yes, yes, he'slways poking fun at me.... Ah, well! Let him!" And he began readingilibin's letter which was written in French. He read withoutnderstanding half of it, read only to forget, if but for a moment,hat he had too long been thinking of so painfully to the exclusion ofll else.BK5|CH9
	CHAPTER IX
	Bilibin was now at army headquarters in a diplomatic capacity, andhough he wrote in French and used French jests and French idioms,e described the whole campaign with a fearless self-censure andelf-derision genuinely Russian. Bilibin wrote that the obligationf diplomatic discretion tormented him, and he was happy to have inrince Andrew a reliable correspondent to whom he could pour out theile he had accumulated at the sight of all that was being done in thermy. The letter was old, having been written before the battle atreussisch-Eylau.
	"Since the day of our brilliant success at Austerlitz," wroteilibin, "as you know, my dear prince, I never leave headquarters. Iave certainly acquired a taste for war, and it is just as well fore; what I have seen during these last three months is incredible.
	"I begin ab ovo. 'The enemy of the human race,' as you know, attackshe Prussians. The Prussians are our faithful allies who have onlyetrayed us three times in three years. We take up their cause, but iturns out that 'the enemy of the human race' pays no heed to ourine speeches and in his rude and savage way throws himself on therussians without giving them time to finish the parade they hadegun, and in two twists of the hand he breaks them to smithereens andnstalls himself in the palace at Potsdam.
	"'I most ardently desire,' writes the King of Prussia toonaparte, 'that Your Majesty should be received and treated in myalace in a manner agreeable to yourself, and in so far asircumstances allowed, I have hastened to take all steps to thatnd. May I have succeeded!' The Prussian generals pride themselvesn being polite to the French and lay down their arms at the firstemand.
	"The head of the garrison at Glogau, with ten thousand men, asks theing of Prussia what he is to do if he is summoned to surrender....ll this is absolutely true.
	"In short, hoping to settle matters by taking up a warlike attitude,t turns out that we have landed ourselves in war, and what is more,n war on our own frontiers, with and for the King of Prussia. We haveverything in perfect order, only one little thing is lacking, namely, commander in chief. As it was considered that the Austerlitz successight have been more decisive had the commander in chief not been sooung, all our octogenarians were reviewed, and of Prozorovski andamenski the latter was preferred. The general comes to us,uvorov-like, in a kibitka, and is received with acclamations of joynd triumph.
	"On the 4th, the first courier arrives from Petersburg. The mailsre taken to the field marshal's room, for he likes to do everythingimself. I am called in to help sort the letters and take thoseeant for us. The field marshal looks on and waits for lettersddressed to him. We search, but none are to be found. The fieldarshal grows impatient and sets to work himself and finds lettersrom the Emperor to Count T., Prince V., and others. Then he burstsnto one of his wild furies and rages at everyone and everything,eizes the letters, opens them, and reads those from the Emperorddressed to others. 'Ah! So that's the way they treat me! Noonfidence in me! Ah, ordered to keep an eye on me! Very well then!et along with you!' So he writes the famous order of the day toeneral Bennigsen:
	'I am wounded and cannot ride and consequently cannot command thermy. You have brought your army corps to Pultusk, routed: here its exposed, and without fuel or forage, so something must be done,nd, as you yourself reported to Count Buxhowden yesterday, you musthink of retreating to our frontier- which do today.'
	"'From all my riding,' he writes to the Emperor, 'I have got aaddle sore which, coming after all my previous journeys, quiterevents my riding and commanding so vast an army, so I have passed onhe command to the general next in seniority, Count Buxhowden,aving sent him my whole staff and all that belongs to it, advisingim if there is a lack of bread, to move farther into the interiorf Prussia, for only one day's ration of bread remains, and in someegiments none at all, as reported by the division commanders,stermann and Sedmoretzki, and all that the peasants had has beenaten up. I myself will remain in hospital at Ostrolenka till Iecover. In regard to which I humbly submit my report, with thenformation that if the army remains in its present bivouac anotherortnight there will not be a healthy man left in it by spring.
	"'Grant leave to retire to his country seat to an old man who islready in any case dishonored by being unable to fulfill the greatnd glorious task for which he was chosen. I shall await your mostracious permission here in hospital, that I may not have to playhe part of a secretary rather than commander in the army. Myemoval from the army does not produce the slightest stir- a blind manas left it. There are thousands such as I in Russia.'
	"The field marshal is angry with the Emperor and he punishes us all,sn't it logical?
	"This is the first act. Those that follow are naturally increasinglynteresting and entertaining. After the field marshal's departure itppears that we are within sight of the enemy and must give battle.uxhowden is commander in chief by seniority, but General Bennigsenoes not quite see it; more particularly as it is he and his corps whore within sight of the enemy and he wishes to profit by thepportunity to fight a battle 'on his own hand' as the Germans say. Heoes so. This is the battle of Pultusk, which is considered a greatictory but in my opinion was nothing of the kind. We civilians, asou know, have a very bad way of deciding whether a battle was wonr lost. Those who retreat after a battle have lost it is what we say;nd according to that it is we who lost the battle of Pultusk. Inhort, we retreat after the battle but send a courier to Petersburgith news of a victory, and General Bennigsen, hoping to receiverom Petersburg the post of commander in chief as a reward for hisictory, does not give up the command of the army to Generaluxhowden. During this interregnum we begin a very original andnteresting series of maneuvers. Our aim is no longer, as it shoulde, to avoid or attack the enemy, but solely to avoid Generaluxhowden who by right of seniority should be our chief. Sonergetically do we pursue this aim that after crossing annfordable river we burn the bridges to separate ourselves from ournemy, who at the moment is not Bonaparte but Buxhowden. Generaluxhowden was all but attacked and captured by a superior enemyorce as a result of one of these maneuvers that enabled us toscape him. Buxhowden pursues us- we scuttle. He hardly crosses theiver to our side before we recross to the other. At last our enemy.uxhowden, catches us and attacks. Both generals are angry, and theesult is a challenge on Buxhowden's part and an epileptic fit onennigsen's. But at the critical moment the courier who carried theews of our victory at Pultusk to Petersburg returns bringing ourppointment as commander in chief, and our first foe, Buxhowden, isanquished; we can now turn our thoughts to the second, Bonaparte. Buts it turns out, just at that moment a third enemy rises before us-amely the Orthodox Russian soldiers, loudly demanding bread, meat,iscuits, fodder, and whatnot! The stores are empty, the roadsmpassable. The Orthodox begin looting, and in a way of which our lastampaign can give you no idea. Half the regiments form bands and scourhe countryside and put everything to fire and sword. Thenhabitants are totally ruined, the hospitals overflow with sick,nd famine is everywhere. Twice the marauders even attack oureadquarters, and the commander in chief has to ask for a battalion toisperse them. During one of these attacks they carried off my emptyortmanteau and my dressing gown. The Emperor proposes to give allommanders of divisions the right to shoot marauders, but I muchear this will oblige one half the army to shoot the other."
	At first Prince Andrew read with his eyes only, but after a while,n spite of himself (although he knew how far it was safe to trustilibin), what he had read began to interest him more and more. Whene had read thus far, he crumpled the letter up and threw it away.t was not what he had read that vexed him, but the fact that the lifeut there in which he had now no part could perturb him. He shut hisyes, rubbed his forehead as if to rid himself of all interest in whate had read, and listened to what was passing in the nursery. Suddenlye thought he heard a strange noise through the door. He was seizedith alarm lest something should have happened to the child while heas reading the letter. He went on tiptoe to the nursery door andpened it.
	Just as he went in he saw that the nurse was hiding something fromim with a scared look and that Princess Mary was no longer by theot.
	"My dear," he heard what seemed to him her despairing whisper behindim.
	As often happens after long sleeplessness and long anxiety, he waseized by an unreasoning panic- it occurred to him that the childas dead. All that he saw and heard seemed to confirm this terror.
	"All is over," he thought, and a cold sweat broke out on hisorehead. He went to the cot in confusion, sure that he would findt empty and that the nurse had been hiding the dead baby. He drew theurtain aside and for some time his frightened, restless eyes couldot find the baby. At last he saw him: the rosy boy had tossed aboutill he lay across the bed with his head lower than the pillow, andas smacking his lips in his sleep and breathing evenly.
	Prince Andrew was as glad to find the boy like that, as if he hadlready lost him. He bent over him and, as his sister had taughtim, tried with his lips whether the child was still feverish. Theoft forehead was moist. Prince Andrew touched the head with his hand;ven the hair was wet, so profusely had the child perspired. He wasot dead, but evidently the crisis was over and he was convalescent.rince Andrew longed to snatch up, to squeeze, to hold to his heart,his helpless little creature, but dared not do so. He stood over him,azing at his head and at the little arms and legs which showednder the blanket. He heard a rustle behind him and a shadowppeared under the curtain of the cot. He did not look round, buttill gazing at the infant's face listened to his regular breathing.he dark shadow was Princess Mary, who had come up to the cot withoiseless steps, lifted the curtain, and dropped it again behinder. Prince Andrew recognized her without looking and held out hisand to her. She pressed it.
	"He has perspired," said Prince Andrew.
	"I was coming to tell you so."
	The child moved slightly in his sleep, smiled, and rubbed hisorehead against the pillow.
	Prince Andrew looked at his sister. In the dim shadow of the curtainer luminous eyes shone more brightly than usual from the tears of joyhat were in them. She leaned over to her brother and kissed him,lightly catching the curtain of the cot. Each made the other aarning gesture and stood still in the dim light beneath the curtains if not wishing to leave that seclusion where they three were shutff from all the world. Prince Andrew was the first to move away,uffling his hair against the muslin of the curtain.
	"Yes, this is the one thing left me now," he said with a sigh.BK5|CH10
	CHAPTER X
	Soon after his admission to the Masonic Brotherhood, Pierre wento the Kiev province, where he had the greatest number of serfs,aking with him full directions which he had written down for hiswn guidance as to what he should do on his estates.
	When he reached Kiev he sent for all his stewards to the head officend explained to them his intentions and wishes. He told them thatteps would be taken immediately to free his serfs- and that till thenhey were not to be overburdened with labor, women while nursing theirabies were not to be sent to work, assistance was to be given tohe serfs, punishments were to be admonitory and not corporal, andospitals, asylums, and schools were to be established on all thestates. Some of the stewards (there were semiliterate foremen amonghem) listened with alarm, supposing these words to mean that theoung count was displeased with their management and embezzlement ofoney, some after their first fright were amused by Pierre's lispnd the new words they had not heard before, others simply enjoyedearing how the master talked, while the cleverest among them,ncluding the chief steward, understood from this speech how theyould best handle the master for their own ends.
	The chief steward expressed great sympathy with Pierre's intentions,ut remarked that besides these changes it would be necessary to gonto the general state of affairs which was far from satisfactory.
	Despite Count Bezukhov's enormous wealth, since he had come inton income which was said to amount to five hundred thousand rubles aear, Pierre felt himself far poorer than when his father had made himn allowance of ten thousand rubles. He had a dim perception of theollowing budget:
	About 80,000 went in payments on all the estates to the Land Bank,bout 30,000 went for the upkeep of the estate near Moscow, the townouse, and the allowance to the three princesses; about 15,000 wasiven in pensions and the same amount for asylums; 150,000 alimony wasent to the countess; about 70,00 went for interest on debts. Theuilding of a new church, previously begun, had cost about 10,000 inach of the last two years, and he did not know how the rest, about00,000 rubles, was spent, and almost every year he was obliged toorrow. Besides this the chief steward wrote every year telling him ofires and bad harvests, or of the necessity of rebuilding factoriesnd workshops. So the first task Pierre had to face was one forhich he had very little aptitude or inclination- practical business.
	He discussed estate affairs every day with his chief steward. But heelt that this did not forward matters at all. He felt that theseonsultations were detached from real affairs and did not link up withhem or make them move. On the one hand, the chief steward put thetate of things to him in the very worst light, pointing out theecessity of paying off the debts and undertaking new activitiesith serf labor, to which Pierre did not agree. On the other hand,ierre demanded that steps should be taken to liberate the serfs,hich the steward met by showing the necessity of first paying off theoans from the Land Bank, and the consequent impossibility of a speedymancipation.
	The steward did not say it was quite impossible, but suggestedelling the forests in the province of Kostroma, the land lower downhe river, and the Crimean estate, in order to make it possible: allf which operations according to him were connected with suchomplicated measures- the removal of injunctions, petitions,ermits, and so on- that Pierre became quite bewildered and onlyeplied:
	"Yes, yes, do so."
	Pierre had none of the practical persistence that would have enabledim to attend to the business himself and so he disliked it and onlyried to pretend to the steward that he was attending to it. Theteward for his part tried to pretend to the count that heonsidered these consultations very valuable for the proprietor androublesome to himself.
	In Kiev Pierre found some people he knew, and strangers hastenedo make his acquaintance and joyfully welcomed the rich newcomer,he largest landowner of the province. Temptations to Pierre'sreatest weakness- the one to which he had confessed when admittedo the Lodge- were so strong that he could not resist them. Againhole days, weeks, and months of his life passed in as great a rushnd were as much occupied with evening parties, dinners, lunches,nd balls, giving him no time for reflection, as in Petersburg.nstead of the new life he had hoped to lead he still lived the oldife, only in new surroundings.
	Of the three precepts of Freemasonry Pierre realized that he did notulfill the one which enjoined every Mason to set an example oforal life, and that of the seven virtues he lacked two- moralitynd the love of death. He consoled himself with the thought that heulfilled another of the precepts- that of reforming the human race-nd had other virtues- love of his neighbor, and especiallyenerosity.
	In the spring of 1807 he decided to return to Petersburg. On the waye intended to visit all his estates and see for himself how far hisrders had been carried out and in what state were the serfs whomod had entrusted to his care and whom he intended to benefit.
	The chief steward, who considered the young count's attemptslmost insane- unprofitable to himself, to the count, and to theerfs- made some concessions. Continuing to represent the liberationf the serfs as impracticable, he arranged for the erection of largeuildings- schools, hospitals, and asylums- on all the estatesefore the master arrived. Everywhere preparations were made not foreremonious welcomes (which he knew Pierre would not like), but forust such gratefully religious ones, with offerings of icons and theread and salt of hospitality, as, according to his understanding ofis master, would touch and delude him.
	The southern spring, the comfortable rapid traveling in a Viennaarriage, and the solitude of the road, all had a gladdening effect onierre. The estates he had not before visited were each moreicturesque than the other; the serfs everywhere seemed thriving andouchingly grateful for the benefits conferred on them. Everywhereere receptions, which though they embarrassed Pierre awakened aoyful feeling in the depth of his heart. In one place the peasantsresented him with bread and salt and an icon of Saint Peter and Saintaul, asking permission, as a mark of their gratitude for the benefitse had conferred on them, to build a new chantry to the church atheir own expense in honor of Peter and Paul, his patron saints. Innother place the women with infants in arms met him to thank himor releasing them from hard work. On a third estate the priest,earing a cross, came to meet him surrounded by children whom, byhe count's generosity, he was instructing in reading, writing, andeligion. On all his estates Pierre saw with his own eyes brickuildings erected or in course of erection, all on one plan, forospitals, schools, and almshouses, which were soon to be opened.verywhere he saw the stewards' accounts, according to which theerfs' manorial labor had been diminished, and heard the touchinghanks of deputations of serfs in their full-skirted blue coats.
	What Pierre did not know was that the place where they presented himith bread and salt and wished to build a chantry in honor of Peternd Paul was a market village where a fair was held on St. Peter'say, and that the richest peasants (who formed the deputation) hadegun the chantry long before, but that nine tenths of the peasants inhat villages were in a state of the greatest poverty. He did not knowhat since the nursing mothers were no longer sent to work on hisand, they did still harder work on their own land. He did not knowhat the priest who met him with the cross oppressed the peasants byis exactions, and that the pupils' parents wept at having to letim take their children and secured their release by heavy payments.e did not know that the brick buildings, built to plan, were beinguilt by serfs whose manorial labor was thus increased, thoughessened on paper. He did not know that where the steward had shownim in the accounts that the serfs' payments had been diminished by third, their obligatory manorial work had been increased by aalf. And so Pierre was delighted with his visit to his estates anduite recovered the philanthropic mood in which he had leftetersburg, and wrote enthusiastic letters to his "brother-instructor"s he called the Grand Master.
	"How easy it is, how little effort it needs, to do so much good,"hought Pierre, "and how little attention we pay to it!"
	He was pleased at the gratitude he received, but felt abashed ateceiving it. This gratitude reminded him of how much more he might door these simple, kindly people.
	The chief steward, a very stupid but cunning man who saw perfectlyhrough the naive and intelligent count and played with him as with toy, seeing the effect these prearranged receptions had on Pierre,ressed him still harder with proofs of the impossibility and abovell the uselessness of freeing the serfs, who were quite happy as itas.
	Pierre in his secret soul agreed with the steward that it would beifficult to imagine happier people, and that God only knew what wouldappen to them when they were free, but he insisted, thougheluctantly, on what he thought right. The steward promised to doll in his power to carry out the count's wishes, seeing clearlyhat not only would the count never be able to find out whether alleasures had been taken for the sale of the land and forests and toelease them from the Land Bank, but would probably never even inquirend would never know that the newly erected buildings were standingmpty and that the serfs continued to give in money and work allhat other people's serfs gave- that is to say, all that could beot out of them.BK5|CH11
	CHAPTER XI
	Returning from his journey through South Russia in the happiesttate of mind, Pierre carried out an intention he had long had ofisiting his friend Bolkonski, whom he had not seen for two years.
	Bogucharovo lay in a flat uninteresting part of the country amongields and forests of fir and birch, which were partly cut down. Theouse lay behind a newly dug pond filled with water to the brink andith banks still bare of grass. It was at the end of a village thattretched along the highroad in the midst of a young copse in whichere a few fir trees.
	The homestead consisted of a threshing floor, outhouses, stables, bathhouse, a lodge, and a large brick house with semicircular facadetill in course of construction. Round the house was a garden newlyaid out. The fences and gates were new and solid; two fire pumpsnd a water cart, painted green, stood in a shed; the paths weretraight, the bridges were strong and had handrails. Everything boren impress of tidiness and good management. Some domestic serfs Pierreet, in reply to inquiries as to where the prince lived, pointed out amall newly built lodge close to the pond. Anton, a man who had lookedfter Prince Andrew in his boyhood, helped Pierre out of his carriage,aid that the prince was at home, and showed him into a clean littlenteroom.
	Pierre was struck by the modesty of the small though clean housefter the brilliant surroundings in which he had last met his friendn Petersburg.
	He quickly entered the small reception room with itstill-unplastered wooden walls redolent of pine, and would have gonearther, but Anton ran ahead on tiptoe and knocked at a door.
	"Well, what is it?" came a sharp, unpleasant voice.
	"A visitor," answered Anton.
	"Ask him to wait," and the sound was heard of a chair being pushedack.
	Pierre went with rapid steps to the door and suddenly came face toace with Prince Andrew, who came out frowning and looking old. Pierrembraced him and lifting his spectacles kissed his friend on the cheeknd looked at him closely.
	"Well, I did not expect you, I am very glad," said Prince Andrew.
	Pierre said nothing; he looked fixedly at his friend withurprise. He was struck by the change in him. His words were kindlynd there was a smile on his lips and face, but his eyes were dull andifeless and in spite of his evident wish to do so he could not givehem a joyous and glad sparkle. Prince Andrew had grown thinner,aler, and more manly-looking, but what amazed and estranged Pierreill he got used to it were his inertia and a wrinkle on his browndicating prolonged concentration on some one thought.
	As is usually the case with people meeting after a prolongedeparation, it was long before their conversation could settle onnything. They put questions and gave brief replies about thingshey knew ought to be talked over at length. At last theonversation gradually settled on some of the topics at firstightly touched on: their past life, plans for the future, Pierre'sourneys and occupations, the war, and so on. The preoccupation andespondency which Pierre had noticed in his friend's look was nowtill more clearly expressed in the smile with which he listened toierre, especially when he spoke with joyful animation of the pastr the future. It was as if Prince Andrew would have liked toympathize with what Pierre was saying, but could not. The latteregan to feel that it was in bad taste to speak of his enthusiasms,reams, and hopes of happiness or goodness, in Prince Andrew'sresence. He was ashamed to express his new Masonic views, which hadeen particularly revived and strengthened by his late tour. Hehecked himself, fearing to seem naive, yet he felt an irresistibleesire to show his friend as soon as possible that he was now auite different, and better, Pierre than he had been in Petersburg.
	"I can't tell you how much I have lived through since then. I hardlynow myself again."
	"Yes, we have altered much, very much, since then," said Princendrew.
	"Well, and you? What are your plans?"
	"Plans!" repeated Prince Andrew ironically. "My plans?" he said,s if astonished at the word. "Well, you see, I'm building. I meano settle here altogether next year...."
	Pierre looked silently and searchingly into Prince Andrew's face,hich had grown much older.
	"No, I meant to ask..." Pierre began, but Prince Andrewnterrupted him.
	"But why talk of me?... Talk to me, yes, tell me about yourravels and all you have been doing on your estates."
	Pierre began describing what he had done on his estates, trying asar as possible to conceal his own part in the improvements that hadeen made. Prince Andrew several times prompted Pierre's story of whate had been doing, as though it were all an old-time story, and heistened not only without interest but even as if ashamed of whatierre was telling him.
	Pierre felt uncomfortable and even depressed in his friend's companynd at last became silent.
	"I'll tell you what, my dear fellow," said Prince Andrew, whovidently also felt depressed and constrained with his visitor, "Im only bivouacking here and have just come to look round. I amoing back to my sister today. I will introduce you to her. But ofourse you know her already," he said, evidently trying to entertain aisitor with whom he now found nothing in common. "We will go afterinner. And would you now like to look round my place?"
	They went out and walked about till dinnertime, talking of theolitical news and common acquaintances like people who do not knowach other intimately. Prince Andrew spoke with some animation andnterest only of the new homestead he was constructing and itsuildings, but even here, while on the scaffolding, in the midst of talk explaining the future arrangements of the house, he interruptedimself:
	"However, this is not at all interesting. Let us have dinner, andhen we'll set off."
	At dinner, conversation turned on Pierre's marriage.
	"I was very much surprised when I heard of it," said Prince Andrew.
	Pierre blushed, as he always did when it was mentioned, and saidurriedly: "I will tell you some time how it all happened. But younow it is all over, and forever."
	"Forever?" said Prince Andrew. "Nothing's forever."
	"But you know how it all ended, don't you? You heard of the duel?"
	"And so you had to go through that too!"
	"One thing I thank God for is that I did not kill that man," saidierre.
	"Why so?" asked Prince Andrew. "To kill a vicious dog is a very goodhing really."
	"No, to kill a man is bad- wrong."
	"Why is it wrong?" urged Prince Andrew. "It is not given to man tonow what is right and what is wrong. Men always did and always willrr, and in nothing more than in what they consider right and wrong."
	"What does harm to another is wrong," said Pierre, feeling withleasure that for the first time since his arrival Prince Andrew wasoused, had begun to talk, and wanted to express what had broughtim to his present state.
	"And who has told you what is bad for another man?" he asked.
	"Bad! Bad!" exclaimed Pierre. "We all know what is bad forurselves."
	"Yes, we know that, but the harm I am conscious of in myself isomething I cannot inflict on others," said Prince Andrew, growingore and more animated and evidently wishing to express his newutlook to Pierre. He spoke in French. "I only know two very realvils in life: remorse and illness. The only good is the absence ofhose evils. To live for myself avoiding those two evils is my wholehilosophy now."
	"And love of one's neighbor, and self-sacrifice?" began Pierre. "No, can't agree with you! To live only so as not to do evil and not toave to repent is not enough. I lived like that, I lived for myselfnd ruined my life. And only now when I am living, or at least trying"Pierre's modesty made him correct himself) "to live for others,nly now have I understood all the happiness of life. No, I shallot agree with you, and you do not really believe what you areaying." Prince Andrew looked silently at Pierre with an ironic smile.
	"When you see my sister, Princess Mary, you'll get on with her,"e said. "Perhaps you are right for yourself," he added after ahort pause, "but everyone lives in his own way. You lived forourself and say you nearly ruined your life and only foundappiness when you began living for others. I experienced just theeverse. I lived for glory.- And after all what is glory? The sameove of others, a desire to do something for them, a desire forheir approval.- So I lived for others, and not almost, but quite,uined my life. And I have become calmer since I began to live onlyor myself."
	"But what do you mean by living only for yourself?" asked Pierre,rowing excited. "What about your son, your sister, and your father?"
	"But that's just the same as myself- they are not others," explainedrince Andrew. "The others, one's neighbors, le prochain, as you andrincess Mary call it, are the chief source of all error and evil.e prochain- your Kiev peasants to whom you want to do good."
	And he looked at Pierre with a mocking, challenging expression. Hevidently wished to draw him on.
	"You are joking," replied Pierre, growing more and more excited.What error or evil can there be in my wishing to do good, and evenoing a little- though I did very little and did it very badly? Whatvil can there be in it if unfortunate people, our serfs, peopleike ourselves, were growing up and dying with no idea of God andruth beyond ceremonies and meaningless prayers and are now instructedn a comforting belief in future life, retribution, recompense, andonsolation? What evil and error are there in it, if people were dyingf disease without help while material assistance could so easily beendered, and I supplied them with a doctor, a hospital, and an asylumor the aged? And is it not a palpable, unquestionable good if aeasant, or a woman with a baby, has no rest day or night and I givehem rest and leisure?" said Pierre, hurrying and lisping. "And I haveone that though badly and to a small extent; but I have doneomething toward it and you cannot persuade me that it was not aood action, and more than that, you can't make me believe that you doot think so yourself. And the main thing is," he continued, "that Inow, and know for certain, that the enjoyment of doing this good ishe only sure happiness in life."
	"Yes, if you put it like that it's quite a different matter," saidrince Andrew. "I build a house and lay out a garden, and you buildospitals. The one and the other may serve as a pastime. But what'sight and what's good must be judged by one who knows all, but noty us. Well, you want an argument," he added, come on then."
	They rose from the table and sat down in the entrance porch whicherved as a veranda.
	"Come, let's argue then," said Prince Andrew, "You talk of schools,"e went on, crooking a finger, "education and so forth; that is, youant to raise him" (pointing to a peasant who passed by them takingff his cap) "from his animal condition and awaken in him spiritualeeds, while it seems to me that animal happiness is the onlyappiness possible, and that is just what you want to deprive himf. I envy him, but you want to make him what I am, without giving himy means. Then you say, 'lighten his toil.' But as I see it,hysical labor is as essential to him, as much a condition of hisxistence, as mental activity is to you or me. You can't helphinking. I go to bed after two in the morning, thoughts come and Ian't sleep but toss about till dawn, because I think and can't helphinking, just as he can't help plowing and mowing; if he didn't, heould go to the drink shop or fall ill. Just as I could not standis terrible physical labor but should die of it in a week, so heould not stand my physical idleness, but would grow fat and die.he third thing- what else was it you talked about?" and Prince Andrewrooked a third finger. "Ah, yes, hospitals, medicine. He has a fit,e is dying, and you come and bleed him and patch him up. He will dragbout as a cripple, a burden to everybody, for another ten years. Itould be far easier and simpler for him to die. Others are beingorn and there are plenty of them as it is. It would be different ifou grudged losing a laborer- that's how I regard him- but you want toure him from love of him. And he does not want that. And besides,hat a notion that medicine ever cured anyone! Killed them, yes!" saide, frowning angrily and turning away from Pierre.
	Prince Andrew expressed his ideas so clearly and distinctly thatt was evident he had reflected on this subject more than once, and hepoke readily and rapidly like a man who has not talked for a longime. His glance became more animated as his conclusions became moreopeless.
	"Oh, that is dreadful, dreadful!" said Pierre. "I don't understandow one can live with such ideas. I had such moments myself not longgo, in Moscow and when traveling, but at such times I collapsed sohat I don't live at all- everything seems hateful to me... myselfost of all. Then I don't eat, don't wash... and how is it withou?..."
	"Why not wash? That is not cleanly," said Prince Andrew; "on theontrary one must try to make one's life as pleasant as possible.'m alive, that is not my fault, so I must live out my life as best can without hurting others."
	"But with such ideas what motive have you for living? One wouldit without moving, undertaking nothing...."
	"Life as it is leaves one no peace. I should be thankful to doothing, but here on the one hand the local nobility have done mehe honor to choose me to be their marshal; it was all I could do toet out of it. They could not understand that I have not the necessaryualifications for it- the kind of good-natured, fussy shallownessecessary for the position. Then there's this house, which must beuilt in order to have a nook of one's own in which to be quiet. Andow there's this recruiting."
	"Why aren't you serving in the army?"
	"After Austerlitz!" said Prince Andrew gloomily. "No, thank you veryuch! I have promised myself not to serve again in the activeussian army. And I won't- not even if Bonaparte were here at Smolenskhreatening Bald Hills- even then I wouldn't serve in the Russianrmy! Well, as I was saying," he continued, recovering hisomposure, "now there's this recruiting. My father is chief in commandf the Third District, and my only way of avoiding active service iso serve under him."
	"Then you are serving?"
	"I am."
	He paused a little while.
	"And why do you serve?"
	"Why, for this reason! My father is one of the most remarkable menf his time. But he is growing old, and though not exactly cruel heas too energetic a character. He is so accustomed to unlimitedower that he is terrible, and now he has this authority of aommander in chief of the recruiting, granted by the Emperor. If I hadeen two hours late a fortnight ago he would have had a paymaster'slerk at Yukhnovna hanged," said Prince Andrew with a smile. "So Im serving because I alone have any influence with my father, andow and then can save him from actions which would torment himfterwards."
	"Well, there you see!"
	"Yes, but it is not as you imagine," Prince Andrew continued. "I didot, and do not, in the least care about that scoundrel of a clerk whoad stolen some boots from the recruits; I should even have beenery glad to see him hanged, but I was sorry for my father- that agains for myself."
	Prince Andrew grew more and more animated. His eyes glitteredeverishly while he tried to prove to Pierre that in his actions thereas no desire to do good to his neighbor.
	"There now, you wish to liberate your serfs," he continued; "that is very good thing, but not for you- I don't suppose you ever hadnyone flogged or sent to Siberia- and still less for your serfs. Ifhey are beaten, flogged, or sent to Siberia, I don't suppose they areny the worse off. In Siberia they lead the same animal life, andhe stripes on their bodies heal, and they are happy as before. But its a good thing for proprietors who perish morally, bring remorse uponhemselves, stifle this remorse and grow callous, as a result of beingble to inflict punishments justly and unjustly. It is those people pity, and for their sake I should like to liberate the serfs. Youay not have seen, but I have seen, how good men brought up in thoseraditions of unlimited power, in time when they grow morerritable, become cruel and harsh, are conscious of it, but cannotestrain themselves and grow more and more miserable."
	Prince Andrew spoke so earnestly that Pierre could not help thinkinghat these thoughts had been suggested to Prince Andrew by hisather's case.
	He did not reply.
	"So that's what I'm sorry for- human dignity, peace of mind, purity,nd not the serfs' backs and foreheads, which, beat and shave as youay, always remain the same backs and foreheads."
	"No, no! A thousand times no! I shall never agree with you," saidierre.BK5|CH12
	CHAPTER XII
	In the evening Andrew and Pierre got into the open carriage androve to Bald Hills. Prince Andrew, glancing at Pierre, broke theilence now and then with remarks which showed that he was in a goodemper.
	Pointing to the fields, he spoke of the improvements he was makingn his husbandry.
	Pierre remained gloomily silent, answering in monosyllables andpparently immersed in his own thoughts.
	He was thinking that Prince Andrew was unhappy, had gone astray, didot see the true light, and that he, Pierre, ought to aid,nlighten, and raise him. But as soon as he thought of what hehould say, he felt that Prince Andrew with one word, one argument,ould upset all his teaching, and he shrank from beginning, afraidf exposing to possible ridicule what to him was precious and sacred.
	"No, but why do you think so?" Pierre suddenly began, lowering hisead and looking like a bull about to charge, "why do you think so?ou should not think so."
	"Think? What about?" asked Prince Andrew with surprise.
	"About life, about man's destiny. It can't be so. I myself thoughtike that, and do you know what saved me? Freemasonry! No, don'tmile. Freemasonry is not a religious ceremonial sect, as I thought itas: Freemasonry is the best expression of the best, the eternal,spects of humanity."
	And he began to explain Freemasonry as he understood it to Princendrew. He said that Freemasonry is the teaching of Christianity freedrom the bonds of State and Church, a teaching of equality,rotherhood, and love.
	"Only our holy brotherhood has the real meaning of life, all theest is a dream," said Pierre. "Understand, my dear fellow, thatutside this union all is filled with deceit and falsehood and I agreeith you that nothing is left for an intelligent and good man but toive out his life, like you, merely trying not to harm others. Butake our fundamental convictions your own, join our brotherhood,ive yourself up to us, let yourself be guided, and you will at onceeel yourself, as I have felt myself, a part of that vast invisiblehain the beginning of which is hidden in heaven," said Pierre.
	Prince Andrew, looking straight in front of him, listened in silenceo Pierre's words. More than once, when the noise of the wheelsrevented his catching what Pierre said, he asked him to repeat it,nd by the peculiar glow that came into Prince Andrew's eyes and byis silence, Pierre saw that his words were not in vain and thatrince Andrew would not interrupt him or laugh at what he said.
	They reached a river that had overflowed its banks and which theyad to cross by ferry. While the carriage and horses were being placedn it, they also stepped on the raft.
	Prince Andrew, leaning his arms on the raft railing, gazedilently at the flooding waters glittering in the setting sun.
	"Well, what do you think about it?" Pierre asked. "Why are youilent?"
	"What do I think about it? I am listening to you. It's all veryell.... You say: join our brotherhood and we will show you the aim ofife, the destiny of man, and the laws which govern the world. But whore we? Men. How is it you know everything? Why do I alone not seehat you see? You see a reign of goodness and truth on earth, but Ion't see it."
	Pierre interrupted him.
	"Do you believe in a future life?" he asked.
	"A future life?" Prince Andrew repeated, but Pierre, giving him noime to reply, took the repetition for a denial, the more readily ase knew Prince Andrew's former atheistic convictions.
	"You say you can't see a reign of goodness and truth on earth. Norould I, and it cannot be seen if one looks on our life here as thend of everything. On earth, here on this earth" (Pierre pointed tohe fields), "there is no truth, all is false and evil; but in theniverse, in the whole universe there is a kingdom of truth, and weho are now the children of earth are- eternally- children of thehole universe. Don't I feel in my soul that I am part of this vastarmonious whole? Don't I feel that I form one link, one step, betweenhe lower and higher beings, in this vast harmonious multitude ofeings in whom the Deity- the Supreme Power if you prefer the term- isanifest? If I see, clearly see, that ladder leading from plant toan, why should I suppose it breaks off at me and does not goarther and farther? I feel that I cannot vanish, since nothinganishes in this world, but that I shall always exist and alwaysave existed. I feel that beyond me and above me there are spirits,nd that in this world there is truth."
	"Yes, that is Herder's theory," said Prince Andrew, "but it is nothat which can convince me, dear friend- life and death are whatonvince. What convinces is when one sees a being dear to one, boundp with one's own life, before whom one was to blame and had hopedo make it right" (Prince Andrew's voice trembled and he turned away),and suddenly that being is seized with pain, suffers, and ceases toxist.... Why? It cannot be that there is no answer. And I believehere is.... That's what convinces, that is what has convinced me,"aid Prince Andrew.
	"Yes, yes, of course," said Pierre, "isn't that what I'm saying?"
	"No. All I say is that it is not argument that convinces me of theecessity of a future life, but this: when you go hand in hand withomeone and all at once that person vanishes there, into nowhere,nd you yourself are left facing that abyss, and look in. And I haveooked in...."
	"Well, that's it then! You know that there is a there and there is aomeone? There is the future life. The Someone is- God."
	Prince Andrew did not reply. The carriage and horses had longince been taken off, onto the farther bank, and reharnessed. Theun had sunk half below the horizon and an evening frost wastarring the puddles near the ferry, but Pierre and Andrew, to thestonishment of the footmen, coachmen, and ferrymen, still stood onhe raft and talked.
	"If there is a God and future life, there is truth and good, andan's highest happiness consists in striving to attain them. We mustive, we must love, and we must believe that we live not only today onhis scrap of earth, but have lived and shall live forever, there,n the Whole," said Pierre, and he pointed to the sky.
	Prince Andrew stood leaning on the railing of the raft listeningo Pierre, and he gazed with his eyes fixed on the red reflection ofhe sun gleaming on the blue waters. There was perfect stillness.ierre became silent. The raft had long since stopped and only theaves of the current beat softly against it below. Prince Andrewelt as if the sound of the waves kept up a refrain to Pierre's words,hispering:
	"It is true, believe it."
	He sighed, and glanced with a radiant, childlike, tender look atierre's face, flushed and rapturous, but yet shy before hisuperior friend.
	"Yes, if it only were so!" said Prince Andrew. "However, it isime to get on," he added, and, stepping off the raft, he looked up athe sky to which Pierre had pointed, and for the first time sinceusterlitz saw that high, everlasting sky he had seen while lying onhat battlefield; and something that had long been slumbering,omething that was best within him, suddenly awoke, joyful andouthful, in his soul. It vanished as soon as he returned to theustomary conditions of his life, but he knew that this feelinghich he did not know how to develop existed within him. His meetingith Pierre formed an epoch in Prince Andrew's life. Thoughutwardly he continued to live in the same old way, inwardly heegan a new life.BK5|CH13
	CHAPTER XIII
	It was getting dusk when Prince Andrew and Pierre drove up to theront entrance of the house at Bald Hills. As they approached theouse, Prince Andrew with asmile drew Pierre's attention to aommotion going on at the back porch. A woman, bent with age, with aallet on her back, and a short, long-haired, young man in a blackarment had rushed back to the gate on seeing the carriage driving up.wo women ran out after them, and all four, looking round at thearriage, ran in dismay up the steps of the back porch.
	"Those are Mary's 'God's folk,'" said Prince Andrew. "They haveistaken us for my father. This is the one matter in which sheisobeys him. He orders these pilgrims to be driven away, but sheeceives them."
	"But what are 'God's folk'?" asked Pierre.
	Prince Andrew had no time to answer. The servants came out to meethem, and he asked where the old prince was and whether he wasxpected back soon.
	The old prince had gone to the town and was expected back anyinute.
	Prince Andrew led Pierre to his own apartments, which were alwaysept in perfect order and readiness for him in his father's house;e himself went to the nursery.
	"Let us go and see my sister," he said to Pierre when he returned.I have not found her yet, she is hiding now, sitting with herGod's folk.' It will serve her right, she will be confused, but youill see her 'God's folk.' It's really very curious."
	"What are 'God's folk'?" asked Pierre.
	"Come, and you'll see for yourself."
	Princess Mary really was disconcerted and red patches came on herace when they went in. In her snug room, with lamps burning beforehe icon stand, a young lad with a long nose and long hair, wearing monk's cassock, sat on the sofa beside her, behind a samovar. Nearhem, in an armchair, sat a thin, shriveled, old woman, with a meekxpression on her childlike face.
	"Andrew, why didn't you warn me?" said the princess, with mildeproach, as she stood before her pilgrims like a hen before herhickens.
	"Charmee de vous voir. Je suis tres contente de vous voir,"* sheaid to Pierre as he kissed her hand. She had known him as a child,nd now his friendship with Andrew, his misfortune with his wife,nd above all his kindly, simple face disposed her favorably towardim. She looked at him with her beautiful radiant eyes and seemed toay, "I like you very much, but please don't laugh at my people."fter exchanging the first greetings, they sat down.
	*"Delighted to see you. I am very glad to see you."
	"Ah, and Ivanushka is here too!" said Prince Andrew, glancing with amile at the young pilgrim.
	"Andrew!" said Princess Mary, imploringly. "Il faut que vous sachiezue c'est une femme,"* said Prince Andrew to Pierre.
	"Andrew, au nom de Dieu!"*[2] Princess Mary repeated.
	*"You must know that this is a woman."
	*[2] "For heaven's sake."
	It was evident that Prince Andrew's ironical tone toward theilgrims and Princess Mary's helpless attempts to protect them wereheir customary long-established relations on the matter.
	"Mais, ma bonne amie," said Prince Andrew, "vous devriez auontraire m'etre reconnaissante de ce que j'explique a Pierre votrentimite avec ce jeune homme."*
	*"But, my dear, you ought on the contrary to be grateful to me forxplaining to Pierre your intimacy with this young man."
	"Really?" said Pierre, gazing over his spectacles with curiosity anderiousness (for which Princess Mary was specially grateful to him)nto Ivanushka's face, who, seeing that she was being spoken about,ooked round at them all with crafty eyes.
	Princess Mary's embarrassment on her people's account was quitennecessary. They were not in the least abashed. The old woman,owering her eyes but casting side glances at the newcomers, hadurned her cup upside down and placed a nibbled bit of sugar besidet, and sat quietly in her armchair, though hoping to be offerednother cup of tea. Ivanushka, sipping out of her saucer, lookedith sly womanish eyes from under her brows at the young men.
	"Where have you been? To Kiev?" Prince Andrew asked the old woman.
	"I have, good sir," she answered garrulously. "Just at Christmastime was deemed worthy to partake of the holy and heavenly sacrament athe shrine of the saint. And now I'm from Kolyazin, master, where areat and wonderful blessing has been revealed."
	"And was Ivanushka with you?"
	"I go by myself, benefactor," said Ivanushka, trying to speak in aass voice. "I only came across Pelageya in Yukhnovo..."
	Pelageya interrupted her companion; she evidently wished to tellhat she had seen.
	"In Kolyazin, master, a wonderful blessing has been revealed."
	"What is it? Some new relics?" asked Prince Andrew.
	"Andrew, do leave off," said Princess Mary. "Don't tell him,elageya."
	"No... why not, my dear, why shouldn't I? I like him. He is kind, hes one of God's chosen, he's a benefactor, he once gave me ten rubles, remember. When I was in Kiev, Crazy Cyril says to me (he's one ofod's own and goes barefoot summer and winter), he says, 'Why areou not going to the right place? Go to Kolyazin where aonder-working icon of the Holy Mother of God has been revealed.' Onearing those words I said good-by to the holy folk and went."
	All were silent, only the pilgrim woman went on in measured tones,rawing in her breath.
	"So I come, master, and the people say to me: 'A great blessingas been revealed, holy oil trickles from the cheeks of our blessedother, the Holy Virgin Mother of God'...."
	"All right, all right, you can tell us afterwards," said Princessary, flushing.
	"Let me ask her," said Pierre. "Did you see it yourselves?" henquired.
	"Oh, yes, master, I was found worthy. Such a brightness on theace like the light of heaven, and from the blessed Mother's cheekt drops and drops...."
	"But, dear me, that must be a fraud!" said Pierre, naively, whoad listened attentively to the pilgrim.
	"Oh, master, what are you saying?" exclaimed the horrified Pelageya,urning to Princess Mary for support.
	"They impose on the people," he repeated.
	"Lord Jesus Christ!" exclaimed the pilgrim woman, crossingerself. "Oh, don't speak so, master! There was a general who didot believe, and said, 'The monks cheat,' and as soon as he'd saidt he went blind. And he dreamed that the Holy Virgin Mother of theiev catacombs came to him and said, 'Believe in me and I will makeou whole.' So he begged: 'Take me to her, take me to her.' It's theeal truth I'm telling you, I saw it myself. So he was brought,uite blind, straight to her, and he goes up to her and falls down andays, 'Make me whole,' says he, 'and I'll give thee what the Tsarestowed on me.' I saw it myself, master, the star is fixed into thecon. Well, and what do you think? He received his sight! It's a sino speak so. God will punish you," she said admonishingly, turningo Pierre.
	"How did the star get into the icon?" Pierre asked.
	"And was the Holy Mother promoted to the rank of general?" saidrince Andrew, with a smile.
	Pelageya suddenly grew quite pale and clasped her hands.
	"Oh, master, master, what a sin! And you who have a son!" she began,er pallor suddenly turning to a vivid red. "Master, what have youaid? God forgive you!" And she crossed herself. "Lord forgive him! Myear, what does it mean?..." she asked, turning to Princess Mary.he got up and, almost crying, began to arrange her wallet. Shevidently felt frightened and ashamed to have accepted charity in aouse where such things could be said, and was at the same timeorry to have now to forgo the charity of this house.
	"Now, why need you do it?" said Princess Mary. "Why did you comeo me?..."
	"Come, Pelageya, I was joking," said Pierre. "Princesse, maarole, je n'ai pas voulu l'offenser.* I did not mean anything, Ias only joking," he said, smiling shyly and trying to efface hisffense. "It was all my fault, and Andrew was only joking."
	*"Princess, on my word, I did not wish to offend her."
	Pelageya stopped doubtfully, but in Pierre's face there was such aook of sincere penitence, and Prince Andrew glanced so meekly nowt her and now at Pierre, that she was gradually reassured.BK5|CH14
	CHAPTER XIV
	The pilgrim woman was appeased and, being encouraged to talk, gave aong account of Father Amphilochus, who led so holy a life that hisands smelled of incense, and how on her last visit to Kiev some monkshe knew let her have the keys of the catacombs, and how she, takingome dried bread with her, had spent two days in the catacombs withhe saints. "I'd pray awhile to one, ponder awhile, then go on tonother. I'd sleep a bit and then again go and kiss the relics, andhere was such peace all around, such blessedness, that one don't wanto come out, even into the light of heaven again."
	Pierre listened to her attentively and seriously. Prince Andrew wentut of the room, and then, leaving "God's folk" to finish their tea,rincess Mary took Pierre into the drawing room.
	"You are very kind," she said to him.
	"Oh, I really did not mean to hurt her feelings. I understand themo well and have the greatest respect for them."
	Princess Mary looked at him silently and smiled affectionately.
	"I have known you a long time, you see, and am as fond of you asf a brother," she said. "How do you find Andrew?" she addedurriedly, not giving him time to reply to her affectionate words.I am very anxious about him. His health was better in the winter, butast spring his wound reopened and the doctor said he ought to go awayor a cure. And I am also very much afraid for him spiritually. He hasot a character like us women who, when we suffer, can weep away ourorrows. He keeps it all within him. Today he is cheerful and inood spirits, but that is the effect of your visit- he is not oftenike that. If you could persuade him to go abroad. He needsctivity, and this quiet regular life is very bad for him. Otherson't notice it, but I see it."
	Toward ten o'clock the men servants rushed to the front door,earing the bells of the old prince's carriage approaching. Princendrew and Pierre also went out into the porch.
	"Who's that?" asked the old prince, noticing Pierre as he got outf, the carriage.
	"Ah! Very glad! Kiss me," he said, having learned who the youngtranger was.
	The old prince was in a good temper and very gracious to Pierre.
	Before supper, Prince Andrew, coming back to his father's study,ound him disputing hotly with his visitor. Pierre was maintaininghat a time would come when there would be no more wars. The oldrince disputed it chaffingly, but without getting angry.
	"Drain the blood from men's veins and put in water instead, thenhere will be no more war! Old women's nonsense- old women'sonsense!" he repeated, but still he patted Pierre affectionately onhe shoulder, and then went up to the table where Prince Andrew,vidently not wishing to join in the conversation, was looking overhe papers his father had brought from town. The old prince went up toim and began to talk business.
	"The marshal, a Count Rostov, hasn't sent half his contingent. Heame to town and wanted to invite me to dinner- I gave him a prettyinner!... And there, look at this.... Well, my boy," the old princeent on, addressing his son and patting Pierre on the shoulder. "Aine fellow- your friend- I like him! He stirs me up. Another sayslever things and one doesn't care to listen, but this one talksubbish yet stirs an old fellow up. Well, go! Get along! Perhaps'll come and sit with you at supper. We'll have another dispute. Makeriends with my little fool, Princess Mary," he shouted afterierre, through the door.
	Only now, on his visit to Bald Hills, did Pierre fully realize thetrength and charm of his friendship with Prince Andrew. That charmas not expressed so much in his relations with him as with all hisamily and with the household. With the stern old prince and theentle, timid Princess Mary, though he had scarcely known them, Pierret once felt like an old friend. They were all fond of him already.ot only Princess Mary, who had been won by his gentleness with theilgrims, gave him her most radiant looks, but even the one-year-oldPrince Nicholas" (as his grandfather called him) smiled at Pierre andet himself be taken in his arms, and Michael Ivanovich andademoiselle Bourienne looked at him with pleasant smiles when healked to the old prince.
	The old prince came in to supper; this was evidently on Pierre'sccount. And during the two days of the young man's visit he wasxtremely kind to him and told him to visit them again.
	When Pierre had gone and the members of the household metogether, they began to express their opinions of him as people alwayso after a new acquaintance has left, but as seldom happens, no oneaid anything but what was good of him.BK5|CH15
	CHAPTER XV
	When returning from his leave, Rostov felt, for the first time,ow close was the bond that united him to Denisov and and the wholeegiment.
	On approaching it, Rostov felt as he had done when approaching hisome in Moscow. When he saw the first hussar with the unbuttonedniform of his regiment, when he recognized red-haired Dementyev andaw the picket ropes of the roan horses, when Lavrushka gleefullyhouted to his master, "The count has come!" and Denisov, who had beensleep on his bed, ran all disheveled out of the mud hut to embraceim, and the officers collected round to greet the new arrival, Rostovxperienced the same feeling his mother, his father, and his sisterad embraced him, and tears of joy choked him so that he could notpeak. The regiment was also a home, and as unalterably dear andrecious as his parents' house.
	When he had reported himself to the commander of the regiment andad been reassigned to his former squadron, had been on duty and hadone out foraging, when he had again entered into all the littlenterests of the regiment and felt himself deprived of liberty andound in one narrow, unchanging frame, he experienced the same sensef peace, of moral support, and the same sense being at home here inis own place, as he had felt under the parental roof. But here wasone of all that turmoil of the world at large, where he did notnow his right place and took mistaken decisions; here was no Sonyaith whom he ought, or ought not, to have an explanation; here waso possibility of going there or not going there; here there wereot twenty-four hours in the day which could be spent in such aariety of ways; there was not that innumerable crowd of people ofhom not one was nearer to him or farther from him than another; thereere none of those uncertain and undefined money relations with hisather, and nothing to recall that terrible loss to Dolokhov. Here, inhe regiment, all was clear and simple. The whole world was dividednto two unequal parts: one, our Pavlograd regiment; the other, allhe rest. And the rest was no concern of his. In the regiment,verything was definite: who was lieutenant, who captain, who was aood fellow, who a bad one, and most of all, who was a comrade. Theanteenkeeper gave one credit, one's pay came every four months, thereas nothing to think out or decide, you had only to do nothing thatas considered bad in the Pavlograd regiment and, when given an order,o do what was clearly, distinctly, and definitely ordered- and allould be well.
	Having once more entered into the definite conditions of thisegimental life, Rostov felt the joy and relief a tired man feels onying down to rest. Life in the regiment, during this campaign, wasll the pleasanter for him, because, after his loss to Dolokhov (forhich, in spite of all his family's efforts to console him, he couldot forgive himself), he had made up his mind to atone for his faulty serving, not as he had done before, but really well, and by being aerfectly first-rate comrade and officer- in a word, a splendid manltogether, a thing which seemed so difficult out in the world, but soossible in the regiment.
	After his losses, he had determined to pay back his debt to hisarents in five years. He received ten thousand rubles a year, but nowesolved to take only two thousand and leave the rest to repay theebt to his parents.
	Our army, after repeated retreats and advances and battles atultusk and Preussisch-Eylau, was concentrated near Bartenstein. Itas awaiting the Emperor's arrival and the beginning of a newampaign.
	The Pavlograd regiment, belonging to that part of the army which haderved in the 1805 campaign, had been recruiting up to strength inussia, and arrived too late to take part in the first actions ofhe campaign. It had been neither at Pultusk nor at Preussisch-Eylaund, when it joined the army in the field in the second half of theampaign, was attached to Platov's division.
	Platov's division was acting independently of the main army. Severalimes parts of the Pavlograd regiment had exchanged shots with thenemy, had taken prisoners, and once had even captured Marshaludinot's carriages. In April the Pavlograds were stationedmmovably for some weeks near a totally ruined and deserted Germanillage.
	A thaw had set in, it was muddy and cold, the ice on the riverroke, and the roads became impassable. For days neither provisionsor the men nor fodder for the horses had been issued. As noransports could arrive, the men dispersed about the abandoned andeserted villages, searching for potatoes, but found few even ofhese.
	Everything had been eaten up and the inhabitants had all fled- ifny remained, they were worse than beggars and nothing more could beaken from them; even the soldiers, usually pitiless enough, insteadf taking anything from them, often gave them the last of theirations.
	The Pavlograd regiment had had only two men wounded in action, butad lost nearly half its men from hunger and sickness. In theospitals, death was so certain that soldiers suffering from fever, orhe swelling that came from bad food, preferred to remain on duty, andardly able to drag their legs went to the front rather than to theospitals. When spring came on, the soldiers found a plant justhowing out of the ground that looked like asparagus, which, forome reason, they called "Mashka's sweet root." It was very bitter,ut they wandered about the fields seeking it and dug it out withheir sabers and ate it, though they were ordered not to do so, ast was a noxious plant. That spring a new disease broke out brokeut among the soldiers, a swelling of the arms, legs, and face,hich the doctors attributed to eating this root. But in spite ofll this, the soldiers of Denisov's squadron fed chiefly onMashka's sweet root," because it was the second week that the last ofhe biscuits were being doled out at the rate of half a pound a mannd the last potatoes received had sprouted and frozen.
	The horses also had been fed for a fortnight on straw from thehatched roofs and had become terribly thin, though still covered withufts of felty winter hair.
	Despite this destitution, the soldiers and officers went on livingust as usual. Despite their pale swollen faces and tattered uniforms,he hussars formed line for roll call, kept things in order, groomedheir horses, polished their arms, brought in straw from thehatched roofs in place of fodder, and sat down to dine round thealdrons from which they rose up hungry, joking about their nasty foodnd their hunger. As usual, in their spare time, they lit bonfires,teamed themselves before them naked; smoked, picked out and bakedprouting rotten potatoes, told and listened to stories ofotemkin's and Suvorov's campaigns, or to legends of Alesha the Sly,r the priest's laborer Mikolka.
	The officers, as usual, lived in twos and threes in the roofless,alf-ruined houses. The seniors tried to collect straw and potatoesnd, in general, food for the men. The younger ones occupiedhemselves as before, some playing cards (there was plenty of money,hough there was no food), some with more innocent games, such asuoits and skittles. The general trend of the campaign was rarelypoken of, partly because nothing certain was known about it, partlyecause there was a vague feeling that in the main it was going badly.
	Rostov lived, as before, with Denisov, and since their furlough theyad become more friendly than ever. Denisov never spoke of Rostov'samily, but by the tender friendship his commander showed him,ostov felt that the elder hussar's luckless love for Natasha played aart in strengthening their friendship. Denisov evidently tried toxpose Rostov to danger as seldom as possible, and after an actionreeted his safe return with evident joy. On one of his foragingxpeditions, in a deserted and ruined village to which he had comen search of provisions, Rostov found a family consisting of an oldole and his daughter with an infant in arms. They were half clad,ungry, too weak to get away on foot and had no means of obtaining aonveyance. Rostov brought them to his quarters, placed them in hiswn lodging, and kept them for some weeks while the old man wasecovering. One of his comrades, talking of women, began chaffingostov, saying that he was more wily than any of them and that itould not be a bad thing if he introduced to them the pretty Polishirl he had saved. Rostov took the joke as an insult, flared up, andaid such unpleasant things to the officer that it was all Denisovould do to prevent a duel. When the officer had gone away, Denisov,ho did not himself know what Rostov's relations with the Polishirl might be, began to upbraid him for his quickness of temper, andostov replied:
	"Say what you like.... She is like a sister to me, and I can'tell you how it offended me... because... well, for that reason...."
	Denisov patted him on the shoulder and began rapidly pacing the roomithout looking at Rostov, as was his way at moments of deep feeling.
	"Ah, what a mad bweed you Wostovs are!" he muttered, and Rostovoticed tears in his eyes.BK5|CH16
	CHAPTER XVI
	In April the troops were enlivened by news of the Emperor's arrival,ut Rostov had no chance of being present at the review he held atartenstein, as the Pavlograds were at the outposts far beyond thatlace.
	They were bivouacking. Denisov and Rostov were living in an earthut, dug out for them by the soldiers and roofed with branches andurf. The hut was made in the following manner, which had then comento vogue. A trench was dug three and a half feet wide, four feetight inches deep, and eight feet long. At one end of the trench,teps were cut out and these formed the entrance and vestibule. Therench itself was the room, in which the lucky ones, such as thequadron commander, had a board, lying on piles at the end oppositehe entrance, to serve as a table. On each side of the trench, thearth was cut out to a breadth of about two and a half feet, andhis did duty for bedsteads and couches. The roof was so constructedhat one could stand up in the middle of the trench and could even sitp on the beds if one drew close to the table. Denisov, who was livinguxuriously because the soldiers of his squadron liked him, had also aoard in the roof at the farther end, with a piece of (broken butended) glass in it for a window. When it was very cold, embers fromhe soldiers' campfire were placed on a bent sheet of iron on theteps in the "reception room"- as Denisov called that part of the hut-nd it was then so warm that the officers, of whom there were alwaysome with Denisov and Rostov, sat in their shirt sleeves.
	In April, Rostov was on orderly duty. One morning, between seven andight, returning after a sleepless night, he sent for embers,hanged his rain-soaked underclothes, said his prayers, drank tea, gotarm, then tidied up the things on the table and in his own corner,nd, his face glowing from exposure to the wind and with nothing onut his shirt, lay down on his back, putting his arms under hisead. He was pleasantly considering the probability of beingromoted in a few days for his last reconnoitering expedition, and waswaiting Denisov, who had gone out somewhere and with whom he wanted aalk.
	Suddenly he heard Denisov shouting in a vibrating voice behind theut, evidently much excited. Rostov moved to the window to see whom heas speaking to, and saw the quartermaster, Topcheenko.
	"I ordered you not to let them that Mashka woot stuff!" Denisovas shouting. "And I saw with my own eyes how Lazarchuk bwought somewom the fields."
	"I have given the order again and again, your honor, but theyon't obey," answered the quartermaster.
	Rostov lay down again on his bed and thought complacently: "Letim fuss and bustle now, my job's done and I'm lying down- capitally!"e could hear that Lavrushka- that sly, bold orderly of Denisov's- wasalking, as well as the quartermaster. Lavrushka was sayingomething about loaded wagons, biscuits, and oxen he had seen whene had gone out for provisions.
	Then Denisov's voice was heard shouting farther and farther away.Saddle! Second platoon!"
	"Where are they off to now?" thought Rostov.
	Five minutes later, Denisov came into the hut, climbed with muddyoots on the bed, lit his pipe, furiously scattered his thingsbout, took his leaded whip, buckled on his saber, and went out again.n answer to Rostov's inquiry where he was going, he answeredaguely and crossly that he had some business.
	"Let God and our gweat monarch judge me afterwards!" said Denisovoing out, and Rostov heard the hoofs of several horses splashinghrough the mud. He did not even trouble to find out where Denisov hadone. Having got warm in his corner, he fell asleep and did noteave the hut till toward evening. Denisov had not yet returned. Theeather had cleared up, and near the next hut two officers and a cadetere playing svayka, laughing as they threw their missiles whichuried themselves in the soft mud. Rostov joined them. In the middlef the game, the officers saw some wagons approaching with fifteenussars on their skinny horses behind them. The wagons escorted by theussars drew up to the picket ropes and a crowd of hussarsurrounded them.
	"There now, Denisov has been worrying," said Rostov, "and here arehe provisions."
	"So they are!" said the officers. "Won't the soldiers be glad!"
	A little behind the hussars came Denisov, accompanied by twonfantry officers with whom he was talking.
	Rostov went to meet them.
	"I warn you, Captain," one of the officers, a short thin man,vidently very angry, was saying.
	"Haven't I told you I won't give them up?" replied Denisov.
	"You will answer for it, Captain. It is mutiny- seizing theransport of one's own army. Our men have had nothing to eat for twoays."
	"And mine have had nothing for two weeks," said Denisov.
	"It is robbery! You'll answer for it, sir!" said the infantryfficer, raising his voice.
	"Now, what are you pestewing me for?" cried Denisov, suddenly losingis temper. "I shall answer for it and not you, and you'd better notuzz about here till you get hurt. Be off! Go!" he shouted at thefficers.
	"Very well, then!" shouted the little officer, undaunted and notiding away. "If you are determined to rob, I'll..."
	"Go to the devil! quick ma'ch, while you're safe and sound!" andenisov turned his horse on the officer.
	"Very well, very well!" muttered the officer, threateningly, andurning his horse he trotted away, jolting in his saddle.
	"A dog astwide a fence! A weal dog astwide a fence!" shouted Denisovfter him (the most insulting expression a cavalryman can address to aounted infantryman) and riding up to Rostov, he burst out laughing.
	"I've taken twansports from the infantwy by force!" he said.After all, can't let our men starve."
	The wagons that had reached the hussars had been consigned to annfantry regiment, but learning from Lavrushka that the transportas unescorted, Denisov with his hussars had seized it by force. Theoldiers had biscuits dealt out to them freely, and they even sharedhem with the other squadrons.
	The next day the regimental commander sent for Denisov, andolding his fingers spread out before his eyes said:
	"This is how I look at this affair: I know nothing about it andon't begin proceedings, but I advise you to ride over to the staffnd settle the business there in the commissariat department and ifossible sign a receipt for such and such stores received. If not,s the demand was booked against an infantry regiment, there will be aow and the affair may end badly."
	From the regimental commander's, Denisov rode straight to thetaff with a sincere desire to act on this advice. In the evening heame back to his dugout in a state such as Rostov had never yet seenim in. Denisov could not speak and gasped for breath. When Rostovsked what was the matter, he only uttered some incoherent oaths andhreats in a hoarse, feeble voice.
	Alarmed at Denisov's condition, Rostov suggested that he shouldndress, drink some water, and send for the doctor.
	"Twy me for wobbewy... oh! Some more water... Let them twy me, but'll always thwash scoundwels... and I'll tell the Empewo'...ce..." he muttered.
	The regimental doctor, when he came, said it was absolutelyecessary to bleed Denisov. A deep saucer of black blood was takenrom his hairy arm and only then was he able to relate what hadappened to him.
	"I get there," began Denisov. "'Now then, where's your chief'suarters?' They were pointed out. 'Please to wait.' 'I've widdenwenty miles and have duties to attend to and no time to wait.nnounce me.' Vewy well, so out comes their head chief- also took itnto his head to lecture me: 'It's wobbewy!'- 'Wobbewy,' I say, 'isot done by man who seizes pwovisions to feed his soldiers, but by himho takes them to fill his own pockets!' 'Will you please beilent?' 'Vewy good!' Then he says: 'Go and give a weceipt to theommissioner, but your affair will be passed on to headquarters.' I goo the commissioner. I enter, and at the table... who do you think?o, but wait a bit!... Who is it that's starving us?" shouted Denisov,itting the table with the fist of his newly bled arm so violentlyhat the table nearly broke down and the tumblers on it jumpedbout. "Telyanin! 'What? So it's you who's starving us to death! Ist? Take this and this!' and I hit him so pat, stwaight on hisnout... 'Ah, what a... what...!' and I sta'ted fwashing him...ell, I've had a bit of fun I can tell you!" cried Denisov, gleefulnd yet angry, his showing under his black mustache. "I'd haveilled him if they hadn't taken him away!"
	"But what are you shouting for? Calm yourself," said Rostov. "You'veet your arm bleeding afresh. Wait, we must tie it up again."
	Denisov was bandaged up again and put to bed. Next day he wokealm and cheerful.
	But at noon the adjutant of the regiment came into Rostov's andenisov's dugout with a grave and serious face and regretfullyhowed them a paper addressed to Major Denisov from the regimentalommander in which inquiries were made about yesterday's occurrence.he adjutant told them that the affair was likely to take a very badurn: that a court-martial had been appointed, and that in view of theeverity with which marauding and insubordination were now regarded,egradation to the ranks would be the best that could be hoped for.
	The case, as represented by the offended parties, was that, aftereizing the transports, Major Denisov, being drunk, went to thehief quartermaster and without any provocation called him a thief,hreatened to strike him, and on being led out had rushed into theffice and given two officials a thrashing, and dislocated the armf one of them.
	In answer to Rostov's renewed questions, Denisov said, laughing,hat he thought he remembered that some other fellow had got mixedp in it, but that it was all nonsense and rubbish, and he did notn the least fear any kind of trial, and that if those scoundrelsared attack him he would give them an answer that they would notasily forget.
	Denisov spoke contemptuously of the whole matter, but Rostov knewim too well not to detect that (while hiding it from others) at hearte feared a court-martial and was worried over the affair, which wasvidently taking a bad turn. Every day, letters of inquiry and noticesrom the court arrived, and on the first of May, Denisov was orderedo hand the squadron over to the next in seniority and appear beforehe staff of his division to explain his violence at theommissariat office. On the previous day Platov reconnoitered with twoossack regiments and two squadrons of hussars. Denisov, as was hisont, rode out in front of the outposts, parading his courage. Aullet fired by a French sharpshooter hit him in the fleshy part ofis leg. Perhaps at another time Denisov would not have left theegiment for so slight a wound, but now he took advantage of it toxcuse himself from appearing at the staff and went into hospital.BK5|CH17
	CHAPTER XVII
	In June the battle of Friedland was fought, in which theavlograds did not take part, and after that an armistice wasroclaimed. Rostov, who felt his friend's absence very much, having noews of him since he left and feeling very anxious about his wound andhe progress of his affairs, took advantage of the armistice to geteave to visit Denisov in hospital.
	The hospital was in a small Prussian town that had been twiceevastated by Russian and French troops. Because it was summer, whent is so beautiful out in the fields, the little town presented aarticularly dismal appearance with its broken roofs and fences, itsoul streets, tattered inhabitants, and the sick and drunkenoldiers wandering about.
	The hospital was in a brick building with some of the windowrames and panes broken and a courtyard surrounded by the remains of aooden fence that had been pulled to pieces. Several bandagedoldiers, with pale swollen faces, were sitting or walking about inhe sunshine in the yard.
	Directly Rostov entered the door he was enveloped by a smell ofutrefaction and hospital air. On the stairs he met a Russian armyoctor smoking a cigar. The doctor was followed by a Russianssistant.
	"I can't tear myself to pieces," the doctor was saying. "Come toakar Alexeevich in the evening. I shall be there."
	The assistant asked some further questions.
	"Oh, do the best you can! Isn't it all the same?" The doctor noticedostov coming upstairs.
	"What do you want, sir?" said the doctor. "What do you want? Theullets having spared you, do you want to try typhus? This is aesthouse, sir."
	"How so?" asked Rostov.
	"Typhus, sir. It's death to go in. Only we two, Makeev and I" (heointed to the assistant), "keep on here. Some five of us doctors haveied in this place.... When a new one comes he is done for in a week,"aid the doctor with evident satisfaction. "Prussian doctors have beennvited here, but our allies don't like it at all."
	Rostov explained that he wanted to see Major Denisov of the hussars,ho was wounded.
	"I don't know. I can't tell you, sir. Only think! I am alone inharge of three hospitals with more than four hundred patients! It'sell that the charitable Prussian ladies send us two pounds ofoffee and some lint each month or we should be lost!" he laughed.Four hundred, sir, and they're always sending me fresh ones. Therere four hundred? Eh?" he asked, turning to the assistant.
	The assistant looked fagged out. He was evidently vexed andmpatient for the talkative doctor to go.
	"Major Denisov," Rostov said again. "He was wounded at Molliten."
	"Dead, I fancy. Eh, Makeev?" queried the doctor, in a tone ofndifference.
	The assistant, however, did not confirm the doctor's words.
	"Is he tall and with reddish hair?" asked the doctor.
	Rostov described Denisov's appearance.
	"There was one like that," said the doctor, as if pleased. "That ones dead, I fancy. However, I'll look up our list. We had a list.ave you got it, Makeev?"
	"Makar Alexeevich has the list," answered the assistant. "But ifou'll step into the officers' wards you'll see for yourself," hedded, turning to Rostov.
	"Ah, you'd better not go, sir," said the doctor, "or you may have totay here yourself."
	But Rostov bowed himself away from the doctor and asked thessistant to show him the way.
	"Only don't blame me!" the doctor shouted up after him.
	Rostov and the assistant went into the dark corridor. The smellas so strong there that Rostov held his nose and had to pause andollect his strength before he could go on. A door opened to theight, and an emaciated sallow man on crutches, barefoot and innderclothing, limped out and, leaning against the doorpost, lookedith glittering envious eyes at those who were passing. Glancing in athe door, Rostov saw that the sick and wounded were lying on the floorn straw and overcoats.
	"May I go in and look?"
	"What is there to see?" said the assistant.
	But, just because the assistant evidently did not want him to go in,ostov entered the soldiers' ward. The foul air, to which he hadlready begun to get used in the corridor, was still stronger here. Itas a little different, more pungent, and one felt that this was wheret originated.
	In the long room, brightly lit up by the sun through the largeindows, the sick and wounded lay in two rows with their heads tohe walls, and leaving a passage in the middle. Most of them werenconscious and paid no attention to the newcomers. Those who wereonscious raised themselves or lifted their thin yellow faces, and allooked intently at Rostov with the same expression of hope, of relief,eproach, and envy of another's health. Rostov went to the middle ofhe room and looking through the open doors into the two adjoiningooms saw the same thing there. He stood still, looking silentlyround. He had not at all expected such a sight. Just before him,lmost across the middle of the passage on the bare floor, lay aick man, probably a Cossack to judge by the cut of his hair. Thean lay on his back, his huge arms and legs outstretched. His face wasurple, his eyes were rolled back so that only the whites were seen,nd on his bare legs and arms which were still red, the veins stoodut like cords. He was knocking the back of his head against theloor, hoarsely uttering some word which he kept repeating. Rostovistened and made out the word. It was "drink, drink, a drink!" Rostovlanced round, looking for someone who would put this man back inis place and bring him water.
	"Who looks after the sick here?" he asked the assistant.
	Just then a commissariat soldier, a hospital orderly, came in fromhe next room, marching stiffly, and drew up in front of Rostov.
	"Good day, your honor!" he shouted, rolling his eyes at Rostov andvidently mistaking him for one of the hospital authorities.
	"Get him to his place and give him some water," said Rostov,ointing to the Cossack.
	"Yes, your honor," the soldier replied complacently, and rolling hisyes more than ever he drew himself up still straighter, but did notove.
	"No, it's impossible to do anything here," thought Rostov,owering his eyes, and he was going out, but became aware of anntense look fixed on him on his right, and he turned. Close to theorner, on an overcoat, sat an old, unshaven, gray-bearded soldiers thin as a skeleton, with a stern sallow face and eyes intentlyixed on Rostov. The man's neighbor on one side whispered something toim, pointing at Rostov, who noticed that the old man wanted topeak to him. He drew nearer and saw that the old man had only one legent under him, the other had been amputated above the knee. Hiseighbor on the other side, who lay motionless some distance fromim with his head thrown back, was a young soldier with a snub nose.is pale waxen face was still freckled and his eyes were rolledack. Rostov looked at the young soldier and a cold chill ran down hisack.
	"Why, this one seems..." he began, turning to the assistant.
	"And how we've been begging, your honor," said the old soldier,is jaw quivering. "He's been dead since morning. After all we're men,ot dogs."
	"I'll send someone at once. He shall be taken away- taken away atnce," said the assistant hurriedly. "Let us go, your honor."
	"Yes, yes, let us go," said Rostov hastily, and lowering his eyesnd shrinking, he tried to pass unnoticed between the rows ofeproachful envious eyes that were fixed upon him, and went out of theoom.BK5|CH18
	CHAPTER XVIII
	Going along the corridor, the assistant led Rostov to thefficers' wards, consisting of three rooms, the doors of which stoodpen. There were beds in these rooms and the sick and wounded officersere lying or sitting on them. Some were walking about the rooms inospital dressing gowns. The first person Rostov met in thefficers' ward was a thin little man with one arm, who was walkingbout the first room in a nightcap and hospital dressing gown, with pipe between his teeth. Rostov looked at him, trying to rememberhere he had seen him before.
	"See where we've met again!" said the little man. "Tushin, Tushin,on't you remember, who gave you a lift at Schon Grabern? And I've had bit cut off, you see..." he went on with a smile, pointing to thempty sleeve of his dressing gown. "Looking for Vasili Dmitrichenisov? My neighbor," he added, when he heard who Rostov wanted.Here, here," and Tushin led him into the next room, from whenceame sounds of several laughing voices.
	"How can they laugh, or even live at all here?" thought Rostov,till aware of that smell of decomposing flesh that had been so strongn the soldiers' ward, and still seeming to see fixed on him thosenvious looks which had followed him out from both sides, and the facef that young soldier with eyes rolled back.
	Denisov lay asleep on his bed with his head under the blanket,hough it was nearly noon.
	"Ah, Wostov? How are you, how are you?" he called out, still inhe same voice as in the regiment, but Rostov noticed sadly that underhis habitual ease and animation some new, sinister, hidden feelinghowed itself in the expression of Denisov's face and thentonations of his voice.
	His wound, though a slight one, had not yet healed even now, sixeeks after he had been hit. His face had the same swollen pallor ashe faces of the other hospital patients, but it was not this thattruck Rostov. What struck him was that Denisov did not seem glad toee him, and smiled at him unnaturally. He did not ask about theegiment, nor about the general state of affairs, and when Rostovpoke of these matters did not listen.
	Rostov even noticed that Denisov did not like to be reminded ofhe regiment, or in general of that other free life which was going onutside the hospital. He seemed to try to forget that old life and wasnly interested in the affair with the commissariat officers. Onostov's inquiry as to how the matter stood, he at once producedrom under his pillow a paper he had received from the commissionnd the rough draft of his answer to it. He became animated when heegan reading his paper and specially drew Rostov's attention to thetinging rejoinders he made to his enemies. His hospital companions,ho had gathered round Rostov- a fresh arrival from the world outside-radually began to disperse as soon as Denisov began reading hisnswer. Rostov noticed by their faces that all those gentlemen hadlready heard that story more than once and were tired of it. Only thean who had the next bed, a stout Uhlan, continued to sit on hised, gloomily frowning and smoking a pipe, and little one-armed Tushintill listened, shaking his head disapprovingly. In the middle ofhe reading, the Uhlan interrupted Denisov.
	"But what I say is," he said, turning to Rostov, "it would be bestimply to petition the Emperor for pardon. They say great rewards willow be distributed, and surely a pardon would be granted...."
	"Me petition the Empewo'!" exclaimed Denisov, in a voice to which heried hard to give the old energy and fire, but which sounded liken expression of irritable impotence. "What for? If I were a wobber would ask mercy, but I'm being court-martialed for bwingingobbers to book. Let them twy me, I'm not afwaid of anyone. I'veerved the Tsar and my countwy honowably and have not stolen! And am Io be degwaded?... Listen, I'm w'iting to them stwaight. This ishat I say: 'If I had wobbed the Tweasuwy...'"
	"It's certainly well written," said Tushin, "but that's not theoint, Vasili Dmitrich," and he also turned to Rostov. "One has toubmit, and Vasili Dmitrich doesn't want to. You know the auditor toldou it was a bad business.
	"Well, let it be bad," said Denisov.
	"The auditor wrote out a petition for you," continued Tushin, "andou ought to sign it and ask this gentleman to take it. No doubt he"indicating Rostov) "has connections on the staff. You won't find aetter opportunity."
	"Haven't I said I'm not going to gwovel?" Denisov interrupted him,ent on reading his paper.
	Rostov had not the courage to persuade Denisov, though henstinctively felt that the way advised by Tushin and the otherfficers was the safest, and though he would have been glad to be ofervice to Denisov. He knew his stubborn will and straightforwardasty temper.
	When the reading of Denisov's virulent reply, which took more thann hour, was over, Rostov said nothing, and he spent the rest of theay in a most dejected state of mind amid Denisov's hospital comrades,ho had round him, telling them what he knew and listening to theirtories. Denisov was moodily silent all the evening.
	Late in the evening, when Rostov was about to leave, he askedenisov whether he had no commission for him.
	"Yes, wait a bit," said Denisov, glancing round at the officers, andaking his papers from under his pillow he went to the window, wheree had an inkpot, and sat down to write.
	"It seems it's no use knocking one's head against a wall!" heaid, coming from the window and giving Rostov a large envelope. In itas the petition to the Emperor drawn up by the auditor, in whichenisov, without alluding to the offenses of the commissariatfficials, simply asked for pardon.
	"Hand it in. It seems..."
	He did not finish, but gave a painfully unnatural smile.BK5|CH19
	CHAPTER XIX
	Having returned to the regiment and told the commander the statef Denisov's affairs, Rostov rode to Tilsit with the letter to themperor.
	On the thirteenth of June the French and Russian Emperors arrived inilsit. Boris Drubetskoy had asked the important personage on whome was in attendance, to include him in the suite appointed for thetay at Tilsit.
	"I should like to see the great man," he said, alluding to Napoleon,hom hitherto he, like everyone else, had always called Buonaparte.
	"You are speaking of Buonaparte?" asked the general, smiling.
	Boris looked at his general inquiringly and immediately saw thate was being tested.
	"I am speaking, Prince, of the Emperor Napoleon," he replied. Theeneral patted him on the shoulder, with a smile.
	"You will go far," he said, and took him to Tilsit with him.
	Boris was among the few present at the Niemen on the day the twomperors met. He saw the raft, decorated with monograms, sawapoleon pass before the French Guards on the farther bank of theiver, saw the pensive face of the Emperor Alexander as he sat inilence in a tavern on the bank of the Niemen awaiting Napoleon'srrival, saw both Emperors get into boats, and saw how Napoleon-eaching the raft first- stepped quickly forward to meet Alexander andeld out his hand to him, and how they both retired into the pavilion.ince he had begun to move in the highest circles Boris had made itis habit to watch attentively all that went on around him and to notet down. At the time of the meeting at Tilsit he asked the names ofhose who had come with Napoleon and about the uniforms they wore, andistened attentively to words spoken by important personages. At theoment the Emperors went into the pavilion he looked at his watch, andid not forget to look at it again when Alexander came out. Thenterview had lasted an hour and fifty-three minutes. He noted thisown that same evening, among other facts he felt to be of historicmportance. As the Emperor's suite was a very small one, it was aatter of great importance, for a man who valued his success in theervice, to be at Tilsit on the occasion of this interview between thewo Emperors, and having succeeded in this, Boris felt that henceforthis position was fully assured. He had not only become known, buteople had grown accustomed to him and accepted him. Twice he hadxecuted commissions to the Emperor himself, so that the latter knewis face, and all those at court, far from cold-shouldering him ast first when they considered him a newcomer, would now have beenurprised had he been absent.
	Boris lodged with another adjutant, the Polish Count Zhilinski.hilinski, a Pole brought up in Paris, was rich, and passionately fondf the French, and almost every day of the stay at Tilsit, Frenchfficers of the Guard and from French headquarters were dining andunching with him and Boris.
	On the evening of the twenty-fourth of June, Count Zhilinskirranged a supper for his French friends. The guest of honor was anide-de-camp of Napoleon's, there were also several French officers ofhe Guard, and a page of Napoleon's, a young lad of an oldristocratic French family. That same day, Rostov, profiting by thearkness to avoid being recognized in civilian dress. came to Tilsitnd went to the lodging occupied by Boris and Zhilinski.
	Rostov, in common with the whole army from which he came, was farrom having experienced the change of feeling toward Napoleon andhe French- who from being foes had suddenly become friends- thatad taken place at headquarters and in Boris. In the army, Bonapartend the French were still regarded with mingled feelings of anger,ontempt, and fear. Only recently, talking with one of Platov'sossack officers, Rostov had argued that if Napoleon were takenrisoner he would be treated not as a sovereign, but as a criminal.uite lately, happening to meet a wounded French colonel on theoad, Rostov had maintained with heat that peace was impossibleetween a legitimate sovereign and the criminal Bonaparte. Rostovas therefore unpleasantly struck by the presence of French officersn Boris' lodging, dressed in uniforms he had been accustomed to seerom quite a different point of view from the outposts of the flank.s soon as he noticed a French officer, who thrust his head out of theoor, that warlike feeling of hostility which he always experienced athe sight of the enemy suddenly seized him. He stopped at thehreshold and asked in Russian whether Drubetskoy lived there.oris, hearing a strange voice in the anteroom, came out to meetim. An expression of annoyance showed itself for a moment on his facen first recognizing Rostov.
	"Ah, it's you? Very glad, very glad to see you," he said, however,oming toward him with a smile. But Rostov had noticed his firstmpulse.
	"I've come at a bad time I think. I should not have come, but I haveusiness," he said coldly.
	"No, I only wonder how you managed to get away from your regiment.ans un moment je suis a vous,"* he said, answering someone who calledim.
	*"In a minute I shall be at your disposal."
	"I see I'm intruding," Rostov repeated.
	The look of annoyance had already disappeared from Boris' face:aving evidently reflected and decided how to act, he very quietlyook both Rostov's hands and led him into the next room. His eyes,ooking serenely and steadily at Rostov, seemed to be veiled byomething, as if screened by blue spectacles of conventionality. So iteemed to Rostov.
	"Oh, come now! As if you could come at a wrong time!" said Boris,nd he led him into the room where the supper table was laid andntroduced him to his guests, explaining that he was not a civilian,ut an hussar officer, and an old friend of his.
	"Count Zhilinski- le Comte N. N.- le Capitaine S. S.," said he,aming his guests. Rostov looked frowningly at the Frenchmen, bowedeluctantly, and remained silent.
	Zhilinski evidently did not receive this new Russian person veryillingly into his circle and did not speak to Rostov. Boris did notppear to notice the constraint the newcomer produced and, with theame pleasant composure and the same veiled look in his eyes withhich he had met Rostov, tried to enliven the conversation. One of therenchmen, with the politeness characteristic of his countrymen,ddressed the obstinately taciturn Rostov, saying that the latterad probably come to Tilsit to see the Emperor.
	"No, I came on business," replied Rostov, briefly.
	Rostov had been out of humor from the moment he noticed the lookf dissatisfaction on Boris' face, and as always happens to those in aad humor, it seemed to him that everyone regarded him with aversionnd that he was in everybody's way. He really was in their way, for helone took no part in the conversation which again became general. Theooks the visitors cast on him seemed to say: "And what is heitting here for?" He rose and went up to Boris.
	"Anyhow, I'm in your way," he said in a low tone. "Come and talkver my business and I'll go away."
	"Oh, no, not at all," said Boris. "But if you are tired, come andie down in my room and have a rest."
	"Yes, really..."
	They went into the little room where Boris slept. Rostov, withoutitting down, began at once, irritably (as if Boris were to blame inome way) telling him about Denisov's affair, asking him whether,hrough his general, he could and would intercede with the Emperorn Denisov's behalf and get Denisov's petition handed in. When hend Boris were alone, Rostov felt for the first time that he could notook Boris in the face without a sense of awkwardness. Boris, with oneeg crossed over the other and stroking his left hand with the slenderingers of his right, listened to Rostov as a general listens to theeport of a subordinate, now looking aside and now gazing straightnto Rostov's eyes with the same veiled look. Each time thisappened Rostov felt uncomfortable and cast down his eyes.
	"I have heard of such cases and know that His Majesty is very severen such affairs. I think it would be best not to bring it before themperor, but to apply to the commander of the corps.... But ineneral, I think..."
	"So you don't want to do anything? Well then, say so!" Rostov almosthouted, not looking Boris in the face.
	Boris smiled.
	"On the contrary, I will do what I can. Only I thought..."
	At that moment Zhilinski's voice was heard calling Boris.
	"Well then, go, go, go..." said Rostov, and refusing supper andemaining alone in the little room, he walked up and down for a longime, hearing the lighthearted French conversation from the next room.BK5|CH20
	CHAPTER XX
	Rostov had come to Tilsit the day least suitable for a petition onenisov's behalf. He could not himself go to the general in attendances he was in mufti and had come to Tilsit without permission to do so,nd Boris, even had he wished to, could not have done so on theollowing day. On that day, June 27, the preliminaries of peace wereigned. The Emperors exchanged decorations: Alexander received theross of the Legion of Honor and Napoleon the Order of St. Andrew ofhe First Degree, and a dinner had been arranged for the evening,iven by a battalion of the French Guards to the Preobrazhenskattalion. The Emperors were to be present at that banquet.
	Rostov felt so ill at ease and uncomfortable with Boris that, whenhe latter looked in after supper, he pretended to be asleep, andarly next morning went away, avoiding Boris. In his civilianlothes and a round hat, he wandered about the town, staring at therench and their uniforms and at the streets and houses where theussian and French Emperors were staying. In a square he saw tableseing set up and preparations made for the dinner; he saw theussian and French colors draped from side to side of the streets,ith hugh monograms A and N. In the windows of the houses also flagsnd bunting were displayed.
	"Boris doesn't want to help me and I don't want to ask him. That'settled," thought Nicholas. "All is over between us, but I won't leaveere without having done all I can for Denisov and certainly notithout getting his letter to the Emperor. The Emperor!... He isere!" thought Rostov, who had unconsciously returned to the househere Alexander lodged.
	Saddled horses were standing before the house and the suite weressembling, evidently preparing for the Emperor to come out.
	"I may see him at any moment," thought Rostov. "If only I were toand the letter direct to him and tell him all... could they reallyrrest me for my civilian clothes? Surely not! He would understandn whose side justice lies. He understands everything, knowsverything. Who can be more just, more magnanimous than he? And evenf they did arrest me for being here, what would it matter?" thoughte, looking at an officer who was entering the house the Emperorccupied. "After all, people do go in.... It's all nonsense! I'll gon and hand the letter to the Emperor myself so much the worse forrubetskoy who drives me to it!" And suddenly with a determinatione himself did not expect, Rostov felt for the letter in his pocketnd went straight to the house.
	"No, I won't miss my opportunity now, as I did after Austerlitz," hehought, expecting every moment to meet the monarch, and consciousf the blood that rushed to his heart at the thought. "I will fallt his feet and beseech him. He will lift me up, will listen, and willven thank me. 'I am happy when I can do good, but to remedy injustices the greatest happiness,'" Rostov fancied the sovereign saying.nd passing people who looked after him with curiosity, he entered theorch of the Emperor's house.
	A broad staircase led straight up from the entry, and to the righte saw a closed door. Below, under the staircase, was a door leadingo the lower floor.
	"Whom do you want?" someone inquired.
	"To hand in a letter, a petition, to His Majesty," said Nicholas,ith a tremor in his voice.
	"A petition? This way, to the officer the officer on duty" (he washown the door leading downstairs), "only it won't be accepted."
	On hearing this indifferent voice, Rostov grew frightened at what heas doing; the thought of meeting the Emperor at any moment was soascinating and consequently so alarming that he was ready to runway, but the official who had questioned him opened the door, andostov entered.
	A short stout man of about thirty, in white breeches and highoots and a batiste shirt that he had evidently only just put on,tanding in that room, and his valet was buttoning on to the back ofis breeches a new pair of handsome silk-embroidered braces that,or some reason, attracted Rostov's attention. This man was waspeaking to someone in the adjoining room.
	"A good figure and in her first bloom," he was saying, but on seeingostov, he stopped short and frowned.
	"What is it? A petition?"
	"What is it?" asked the person in the other room.
	"Another petitioner," answered the man with the braces.
	"Tell him to come later. He'll be coming out directly, we must go."
	"Later... later! Tomorrow. It's too late..."
	Rostov turned and was about to go, but the man in the braces stoppedim.
	"Whom have you come from? Who are you?"
	"I come from Major Denisov," answered Rostov.
	"Are you an officer?"
	"Lieutenant Count Rostov."
	"What audacity! Hand it in through your commander. And go along withou... go," and he continued to put on the uniform the valet handedim.
	Rostov went back into the hall and noticed that in the porch thereere many officers and generals in full parade uniform, whom he had toass.
	Cursing his temerity, his heart sinking at the thought of findingimself at any moment face to face with the Emperor and being put tohame and arrested in his presence, fully alive now to the improprietyf his conduct and repenting of it, Rostov, with downcast eyes, wasaking his way out of the house through the brilliant suite when aamiliar voice called him and a hand detained him.
	"What are you doing here, sir, in civilian dress?" asked a deepoice.
	It was a cavalry general who had obtained the Emperor's specialavor during this campaign, and who had formerly commanded theivision in which Rostov was serving.
	Rostov, in dismay, began justifying himself, but seeing theindly, jocular face of the general, he took him aside and in anxcited voice told him the whole affair, asking him to intercede forenisov, whom the general knew. Having heard Rostov to the end, theeneral shook his head gravely.
	"I'm sorry, sorry for that fine fellow. Give me the letter."
	Hardly had Rostov handed him the letter and finished explainingenisov's case, when hasty steps and the jingling of spurs wereeard on the stairs, and the general, leaving him, went to theorch. The gentlemen of the Emperor's suite ran down the stairs andent to their horses. Hayne, the same groom who had been atusterlitz, led up the Emperor's horse, and the faint creak of aootstep Rostov knew at once was heard on the stairs. Forgetting theanger of being recognized, Rostov went close to the porch, togetherith some inquisitive civilians, and again, after two years, saw thoseeatures he adored: that same face and same look and step, and theame union of majesty and mildness.... And the feeling of enthusiasmnd love for his sovereign rose again in Rostov's soul in all itsld force. In the uniform of the Preobrazhensk regiment- whitehamois-leather breeches and high boots- and wearing a star Rostov didot know (it was that of the Legion d'honneur), the monarch came outnto the porch, putting on his gloves and carrying his hat under hisrm. He stopped and looked about him, brightening everything around byis glance. He spoke a few words to some of the generals, and,ecognizing the former commander of Rostov's division, smiled andeckoned to him.
	All the suite drew back and Rostov saw the general talking forome time to the Emperor.
	The Emperor said a few words to him and took a step toward hisorse. Again the crowd of members of the suite and street gazersamong whom was Rostov) moved nearer to the Emperor. Stopping besideis horse, with his hand on the saddle, the Emperor turned to theavalry general and said in a loud voice, evidently wishing to beeard by all:
	"I cannot do it, General. I cannot, because the law is stronger than," and he raised his foot to the stirrup.
	The general bowed his head respectfully, and the monarch mounted andode down the street at a gallop. Beside himself with enthusiasm,ostov ran after him with the crowd.BK5|CH21
	CHAPTER XXI
	The Emperor rode to the square where, facing one another, aattalion of the Preobrazhensk regiment stood on the right and aattalion of the French Guards in their bearskin caps on the left.
	As the Tsar rode up to one flank of the battalions, whichresented arms, another group of horsemen galloped up to thepposite flank, and at the head of them Rostov recognized Napoleon. Itould be no one else. He came at a gallop, wearing a small hat, a blueniform open over a white vest, and the St. Andrew ribbon over hishoulder. He was riding a very fine thoroughbred gray Arab horseith a crimson gold-embroidered saddlecloth. On approachinglexander he raised his hat, and as he did so, Rostov, with hisavalryman's eye, could not help noticing that Napoleon did not sitell or firmly in the saddle. The battalions shouted "Hurrah!" andVive l'Empereur!" Napoleon said something to Alexander, and bothmperors dismounted and took each other's hands. Napoleon's faceore an unpleasant and artificial smile. Alexander was sayingomething affable to him.
	In spite of the trampling of the French gendarmes' horses, whichere pushing back the crowd, Rostov kept his eyes on every movement oflexander and Bonaparte. It struck him as a surprise that Alexanderreated Bonaparte as an equal and that the latter was quite at easeith the Tsar, as if such relations with an Emperor were an everydayatter to him.
	Alexander and Napoleon, with the long train of their suites,pproached the right flank of the Preobrazhensk battalion and cametraight up to the crowd standing there. The crowd unexpectedlyound itself so close to the Emperors that Rostov, standing in theront row, was afraid he might be recognized.
	"Sire, I ask your permission to present the Legion of Honor to theravest of your soldiers," said a sharp, precise voice, articulatingvery letter.
	This was said by the undersized Napoleon, looking up straight intolexander's eyes. Alexander listened attentively to what was said toim and, bending his head, smiled pleasantly.
	"To him who has borne himself most bravely in this last war,"dded Napoleon, accentuating each syllable, as with a composure andssurance exasperating to Rostov, he ran his eyes over the Russiananks drawn up before him, who all presented arms with their eyesixed on their Emperor.
	"Will Your Majesty allow me to consult the colonel?" saidlexander and took a few hasty steps toward Prince Kozlovski, theommander of the battalion.
	Bonaparte meanwhile began taking the glove off his small white hand,ore it in doing so, and threw it away. An aide-de-camp behind himushed forward and picked it up.
	"To whom shall it be given?" the Emperor Alexander askedoslovski, in Russian in a low voice.
	"To whomever Your Majesty commands."
	The Emperor knit his brows with dissatisfaction and, glancingack, remarked:
	"But we must give him an answer."
	Kozlovski scanned the ranks resolutely and included Rostov in hiscrutiny.
	"Can it be me?" thought Rostov.
	"Lazarev!" the colonel called, with a frown, and Lazarev, theirst soldier in the rank, stepped briskly forward.
	"Where are you off to? Stop here!" voices whispered to Lazarev whoid not know where to go. Lazarev stopped, casting a sidelong lookt his colonel in alarm. His face twitched, as often happens tooldiers called before the ranks.
	Napoleon slightly turned his head, and put his plump little hand outehind him as if to take something. The members of his suite, guessingt once what he wanted, moved about and whispered as they passedomething from one to another, and a page- the same one Rostov hadeen the previous evening at Boris'- ran forward and, bowingespectfully over the outstretched hand and not keeping it waiting aoment, laid in it an Order on a red ribbon. Napoleon, withoutooking, pressed two fingers together and the badge was betweenhem. Then he approached Lazarev (who rolled his eyes and persistentlyazed at his own monarch), looked round at the Emperor Alexander tomply that what he was now doing was done for the sake of his ally,nd the small white hand holding the Order touched one of Lazarev'suttons. It was as if Napoleon knew that it was only necessary for hisand to deign to touch that soldier's breast for the soldier to beorever happy, rewarded, and distinguished from everyone else in theorld. Napoleon merely laid the cross on Lazarev's breast and,ropping his hand, turned toward Alexander as though sure that theross would adhere there. And it really did.
	Officious hands, Russian and French, immediately seized the crossnd fastened it to the uniform. Lazarev glanced morosely at the littlean with white hands who was doing something to him and, stilltanding motionless presenting arms, looked again straight intolexander's eyes, as if asking whether he should stand there, or goway, or do something else. But receiving no orders, he remained forome time in that rigid position.
	The Emperors remounted and rode away. The Preobrazhensk battalion,reaking rank, mingled with the French Guards and sat down at theables prepared for them.
	Lazarev sat in the place of honor. Russian and French officersmbraced him, congratulated him, and pressed his hands. Crowds offficers and civilians drew near merely to see him. A rumble ofussian and French voices and laughter filled the air round the tablesn the square. Two officers with flushed faces, looking cheerful andappy, passed by Rostov.
	"What d'you think of the treat? All on silver plate," one of themas saying. "Have you seen Lazarev?"
	"I have."
	"Tomorrow, I hear, the Preobrazhenskis will give them a dinner."
	"Yes, but what luck for Lazarev! Twelve hundred francs' pensionor life."
	"Here's a cap, lads!" shouted a Preobrazhensk soldier, donning ahaggy French cap.
	"It's a fine thing! First-rate!"
	"Have you heard the password?" asked one Guards' officer of another.The day before yesterday it was 'Napoleon, France, bravoure';esterday, 'Alexandre, Russie, grandeur.' One day our Emperor gives itnd next day Napoleon. Tomorrow our Emperor will send a St. George'sross to the bravest of the French Guards. It has to be done. Heust respond in kind."
	Boris, too, with his friend Zhilinski, came to see the Preobrazhenskanquet. On his way back, he noticed Rostov standing by the cornerf a house.
	"Rostov! How d'you do? We missed one another," he said, and couldot refrain from asking what was the matter, so strangely dismal androubled was Rostov's face.
	"Nothing, nothing," replied Rostov.
	"You'll call round?"
	"Yes, I will."
	Rostov stood at that corner for a long time, watching the feast from distance. a distance. In his mind, a painful process was going onhich he could not bring to a conclusion. Terrible doubts rose inis soul. Now he remembered Denisov with his changed expression, hisubmission, and the whole hospital, with arms and legs torn off andts dirt and disease. So vividly did he recall that hospital stench ofead flesh that he looked round to see where the smell came from. Nexte thought of that self-satisfied Bonaparte, with his small whiteand, who was now an Emperor, liked and respected by Alexander. Thenhy those severed arms and legs and those dead men?... Then again hehought of Lazarev rewarded and Denisov punished and unpardoned. Heaught himself harboring such strange thoughts that he was frightened.
	The smell of the food the Preobrazhenskis were eating and a sense ofunger recalled him from these reflections; he had to get something toat before going away. He went to a hotel he had noticed that morning.here he found so many people, among them officers who, likeimself, had come in civilian clothes, that he had difficulty inetting a dinner. Two officers of his own division joined him. Theonversation naturally turned on the peace. The officers, hisomrades, like most of the army, were dissatisfied with the peaceoncluded after the battle of Friedland. They said that had we heldut a little longer Napoleon would have been done for, as his troopsad neither provisions nor ammunition. Nicholas ate and drank (chieflyhe latter) in silence. He finished a couple of bottles of wine byimself. The process in his mind went on tormenting him withouteaching a conclusion. He feared to give way to his thoughts, yetould not get rid of them. Suddenly, on one of the officers' sayinghat it was humiliating to look at the French, Rostov began shoutingith uncalled-for wrath, and therefore much to the surprise of thefficers:
	"How can you judge what's best?" he cried, the blood suddenlyushing to his face. "How can you judge the Emperor's actions? Whatight have we to argue? We cannot comprehend either the Emperor's oris actions!"
	"But I never said a word about the Emperor!" said the officer,ustifying himself, and unable to understand Rostov's outburst, exceptn the supposition that he was drunk.
	But Rostov did not listen to him.
	"We are not diplomatic officials, we are soldiers and nothing more,"e went on. "If we are ordered to die, we must die. If we're punished,t means that we have deserved it, it's not for us to judge. If themperor pleases to recognize Bonaparte as Emperor and to conclude anlliance with him, it means that that is the right thing to do. Ifnce we begin judging and arguing about everything, nothing sacredill be left! That way we shall be saying there is no God- nothing!"houted Nicholas, banging the table- very little to the point as iteemed to his listeners, but quite relevantly to the course of his ownhoughts.
	"Our business is to do our duty, to fight and not to think! That'sll...." said he.
	"And to drink," said one of the officers, not wishing to quarrel.
	"Yes, and to drink," assented Nicholas. "Hullo there! Anotherottle!" he shouted.
	In 1808 the Emperor Alexander went to Erfurt for a fresh interviewith the Emperor Napoleon, and in the upper circles of Petersburghere was much talk of the grandeur of this important meeting.BK5|CH22
	CHAPTER XXII
	In 1809 the intimacy between "the world's two arbiters," as Napoleonnd Alexander were called, was such that when Napoleon declared war onustria a Russian corps crossed the frontier to co-operate with ourld enemy Bonaparte against our old ally the Emperor of Austria, andn court circles the possibility of marriage between Napoleon andne of Alexander's sisters was spoken of. But besides considerationsf foreign policy, the attention of Russian society was at that timeeenly directed on the internal changes that were being undertakenn all the departments of government.
	Life meanwhile- real life, with its essential interests of healthnd sickness, toil and rest, and its intellectual interests inhought, science, poetry, music, love, friendship, hatred, andassions- went on as usual, independently of and apart fromolitical friendship or enmity with Napoleon Bonaparte and from allhe schemes of reconstruction.BK6	                            BOOK SIX: 1808 - 10BK6|CH1
	CHAPTER I
	Prince Andrew had spent two years continuously in the country.
	All the plans Pierre had attempted on his estates- and constantlyhanging from one thing to another had never accomplished- werearried out by Prince Andrew without display and without perceptibleifficulty.
	He had in the highest degree a practical tenacity which Pierreacked, and without fuss or strain on his part this set things going.
	On one of his estates the three hundred serfs were liberated andecame free agricultural laborers- this being one of the firstxamples of the kind in Russia. On other estates the serfs' compulsoryabor was commuted for a quitrent. A trained midwife was engaged forogucharovo at his expense, and a priest was paid to teach reading andriting to the children of the peasants and household serfs.
	Prince Andrew spent half his time at Bald Hills with his fathernd his son, who was still in the care of nurses. The other half hepent in "Bogucharovo Cloister," as his father called Princendrew's estate. Despite the indifference to the affairs of theorld he had expressed to Pierre, he diligently followed all that wentn, received many books, and to his surprise noticed that when he oris father had visitors from Petersburg, the very vortex of life,hese people lagged behind himself- who never left the country- innowledge of what was happening in home and foreign affairs.
	Besides being occupied with his estates and reading a greatariety of books, Prince Andrew was at this time busy with aritical of survey our last two unfortunate campaigns, and withrawing up a proposal for a reform of the army rules and regulations.
	In the spring of 1809 he went to visit the Ryazan estates whichad been inherited by his son, whose guardian he was.
	Warmed by the spring sunshine he sat in the caleche looking at theew grass, the first leaves on the birches, and the first puffs ofhite spring clouds floating across the clear blue sky. He was nothinking of anything, but looked absent-mindedly and cheerfully fromide to side.
	They crossed the ferry where he had talked with Pierre the yearefore. They went through the muddy village, past threshing floors andreen fields of winter rye, downhill where snow still lodged nearhe bridge, uphill where the clay had been liquefied by the rain, pasttrips of stubble land and bushes touched with green here and there,nd into a birch forest growing on both sides of the road. In theorest it was almost hot, no wind could be felt. The birches withheir sticky green leaves were motionless, and lilac-colored flowersnd the first blades of green grass were pushing up and lifting lastear's leaves. The coarse evergreen color of the small fir treescattered here and there among the birches was an unpleasanteminder of winter. On entering the forest the horses began to snortnd sweated visibly.
	Peter the footman made some remark to the coachman; the latterssented. But apparently the coachman's sympathy was not enough foreter, and he turned on the box toward his master.
	"How pleasant it is, your excellency!" he said with a respectfulmile.
	"What?"
	"It's pleasant, your excellency!"
	"What is he talking about?" thought Prince Andrew. "Oh, thepring, I suppose," he thought as he turned round. "Yes, reallyverything is green already.... How early! The birches and cherrynd alders too are coming out.... But the oaks show no sign yet. Ah,ere is one oak!"
	 At the edge of the road stood an oak. Probably ten times the age ofhe birches that formed the forest, it was ten times as thick andwice as tall as they. It was an enormous tree, its girth twice asreat as a man could embrace, and evidently long ago some of itsranches had been broken off and its bark scarred. With its hugengainly limbs sprawling unsymmetrically, and its gnarled hands andingers, it stood an aged, stern, and scornful monster among themiling birch trees. Only the dead-looking evergreen firs dotted aboutn the forest, and this oak, refused to yield to the charm of springr notice either the spring or the sunshine.
	"Spring, love, happiness!" this oak seemed to say. "Are you noteary of that stupid, meaningless, constantly repeated fraud? Alwayshe same and always a fraud? There is no spring, no sun, no happiness!ook at those cramped dead firs, ever the same, and at me too,ticking out my broken and barked fingers just where they haverown, whether from my back or my sides: as they have grown so Itand, and I do not believe in your hopes and your lies."
	As he passed through the forest Prince Andrew turned several timeso look at that oak, as if expecting something from it. Under the oak,oo, were flowers and grass, but it stood among them scowling,igid, misshapen, and grim as ever.
	"Yes, the oak is right, a thousand times right," thought Princendrew. "Let others- the young- yield afresh to that fraud, but wenow life, our life is finished!"
	A whole sequence of new thoughts, hopeless but mournfullyleasant, rose in his soul in connection with that tree. During thisourney he, as it were, considered his life afresh and arrived atis old conclusion, restful in its hopelessness: that it was not forim to begin anything anew- but that he must live out his life,ontent to do no harm, and not disturbing himself or desiringnything.BK6|CH2
	CHAPTER II
	Prince Andrew had to see the Marshal of the Nobility for theistrict in connection with the affairs of the Ryazan estate ofhich he was trustee. This Marshal was Count Ilya Rostov, and in theiddle of May Prince Andrew went to visit him.
	It was now hot spring weather. The whole forest was alreadylothed in green. It was dusty and so hot that on passing near waterne longed to bathe.
	Prince Andrew, depressed and preoccupied with the business abouthich he had to speak to the Marshal, was driving up the avenue in therounds of the Rostovs' house at Otradnoe. He heard merry girlishries behind some trees on the right and saw group of girls running toross the path of his caleche. Ahead of the rest and nearer to him ran dark-haired, remarkably slim, pretty girl in a yellow chintzress, with a white handkerchief on her head from under which looseocks of hair escaped. The girl was shouting something but, seeinghat he was a stranger, ran back laughing without looking at him.
	Suddenly, he did not know why, he felt a pang. The day was soeautiful, the sun so bright, everything around so gay, but thatlim pretty girl did not know, or wish to know, of his existence andas contented and cheerful in her own separate- probably foolish-ut bright and happy life. "What is she so glad about? What is shehinking of? Not of the military regulations or of the arrangementf the Ryazan serfs' quitrents. Of what is she thinking? Why is she soappy?" Prince Andrew asked himself with instinctive curiosity.
	In 1809 Count Ilya Rostov was living at Otradnoe just as he had donen former years, that is, entertaining almost the whole provinceith hunts, theatricals, dinners, and music. He was glad to see Princendrew, as he was to see any new visitor, and insisted on histaying the night.
	During the dull day, in the course of which he was entertained byis elderly hosts and by the more important of the visitors (the oldount's house was crowded on account of an approaching name day),rince Andrew repeatedly glanced at Natasha, gay and laughing amonghe younger members of the company, and asked himself each time, "Whats she thinking about? Why is she so glad?"
	That night, alone in new surroundings, he was long unable toleep. He read awhile and then put out his candle, but relit it. Itas hot in the room, the inside shutters of which were closed. Heas cross with the stupid old man (as he called Rostov), who hadade him stay by assuring him that some necessary documents had notet arrived from town, and he was vexed with himself for havingtayed.
	He got up and went to the window to open it. As soon as he openedhe shutters the moonlight, as if it had long been watching forhis, burst into the room. He opened the casement. The night wasresh, bright, and very still. Just before the window was a row ofollard trees, looking black on one side and with a silvery light onhe other. Beneath the trees grewsome kind of lush, wet, bushyegetation with silver-lit leaves and stems here and there. Fartherack beyond the dark trees a roof glittered with dew, to the right was leafy tree with brilliantly white trunk and branches, and above ithone the moon, nearly at its full, in a pale, almost starless, springky. Prince Andrew leaned his elbows on the window ledge and hisyes rested on that sky.
	His room was on the first floor. Those in the rooms above werelso awake. He heard female voices overhead.
	"Just once more," said a girlish voice above him which Prince Andrewecognized at once.
	"But when are you coming to bed?" replied another voice.
	"I won't, I can't sleep, what's the use? Come now for the lastime."
	 Two girlish voices sang a musical passage- the end of some song.
	"Oh, how lovely! Now go to sleep, and there's an end of it."
	"You go to sleep, but I can't," said the first voice, comingearer to the window. She was evidently leaning right out, for theustle of her dress and even her breathing could be heard.verything was stone-still, like the moon and its light and thehadows. Prince Andrew, too, dared not stir, for fear of betraying hisnintentional presence.
	"Sonya! Sonya!" he again heard the first speaker. "Oh, how can youleep? Only look how glorious it is! Ah, how glorious! Do wake up,onya!" she said almost with tears in her voice. "There never, neveras such a lovely night before!"
	Sonya made some reluctant reply.
	"Do just come and see what a moon!... Oh, how lovely! Comeere.... Darling, sweetheart, come here! There, you see? I feel likeitting down on my heels, putting my arms round my knees like this,training tight, as tight as possible, and flying away! Like this...."
	"Take care, you'll fall out."
	He heard the sound of a scuffle and Sonya's disapproving voice:It's past one o'clock."
	"Oh, you only spoil things for me. All right, go, go!"
	Again all was silent, but Prince Andrew knew she was still sittinghere. From time to time he heard a soft rustle and at times a sigh.
	"O God, O God! What does it mean?" she suddenly exclaimed. "To bedhen, if it must be!" and she slammed the casement.
	"For her I might as well not exist!" thought Prince Andrew whilee listened to her voice, for some reason expecting yet fearing thathe might say something about him. "There she is again! As if itere on purpose," thought he.
	In his soul there suddenly arose such an unexpected turmoil ofouthful thoughts and hopes, contrary to the whole tenor of hisife, that unable to explain his condition to himself he lay downnd fell asleep at once.BK6|CH3
	CHAPTER III
	Next morning, having taken leave of no one but the count, and notaiting for the ladies to appear, Prince Andrew set off for home.
	It was already the beginning of June when on his return journey herove into the birch forest where the gnarled old oak had made sotrange and memorable an impression on him. In the forest thearness bells sounded yet more muffled than they had done six weeksefore, for now all was thick, shady, and dense, and the young firsotted about in the forest did not jar on the general beauty but,ending themselves to the mood around, were delicately green withluffy young shoots.
	The whole day had been hot. Somewhere a storm was gathering, butnly a small cloud had scattered some raindrops lightly, sprinklinghe road and the sappy leaves. The left side of the forest was dark inhe shade, the right side glittered in the sunlight, wet and shiny andcarcely swayed by the breeze. Everything was in blossom, theightingales trilled, and their voices reverberated now near, nowar away.
	"Yes, here in this forest was that oak with which I agreed," thoughtrince Andrew. "But where is it?" he again wondered, gazing at theeft side of the road, and without recognizing it he looked withdmiration at the very oak he sought. The old oak, quite transfigured,preading out a canopy of sappy dark-green foliage, stood rapt andlightly trembling in the rays of the evening sun. Neither gnarledingers nor old scars nor old doubts and sorrows were any of them invidence now. Through the hard century-old bark, even where there wereo twigs, leaves had sprouted such as one could hardly believe the oldeteran could have produced.
	"Yes, it is the same oak," thought Prince Andrew, and all at once heas seized by an unreasoning springtime feeling of joy and renewal.ll the best moments of his life suddenly rose to his memory.usterlitz with the lofty heavens, his wife's dead reproachful face,ierre at the ferry, that girl thrilled by the beauty of the night,nd that night itself and the moon, and.... all this rushed suddenlyo his mind.
	"No, life is not over at thirty-one!" Prince Andrew suddenly decidedinally and decisively. "It is not enough for me to know what I haven me- everyone must know it: Pierre, and that young girl who wantedo fly away into the sky, everyone must know me, so that my life mayot be lived for myself alone while others live so apart from it,ut so that it may be reflected in them all, and they and I may liven harmony!"
	On reaching home Prince Andrew decided to go to Petersburg thatutumn and found all sorts of reasons for this decision. A wholeerics of sensible and logical considerations showing it to bessential for him to go to Petersburg, and even to re-enter theervice, kept springing up in his mind. He could not now understandow he could ever even have doubted the necessity of taking anctive share in life, just as a month before he had not understood howhe idea of leaving the quiet country could ever enter his head. Itow seemed clear to him that all his experience of life must beenselessly wasted unless he applied it to some kind of work and againlayed an active part in life. He did not even remember howormerly, on the strength of similar wretched logical arguments, itad seemed obvious that he would be degrading himself if he now, afterhe lessons he had had in life, allowed himself to believe in theossibility of being useful and in the possibility of happiness orove. Now reason suggested quite the opposite. After that journey toyazan he found the country dull; his former pursuits no longernterested him, and often when sitting alone in his study he got up,ent to the mirror, and gazed a long time at his own face. Then heould turn away to the portrait of his dead Lise, who with hair curled la grecque looked tenderly and gaily at him out of the gilt frame.he did not now say those former terrible words to him, but lookedimply, merrily, and inquisitively at him. And Prince Andrew, crossingis arms behind him, long paced the room, now frowning, now smiling,s he reflected on those irrational, inexpressible thoughts, secret as crime, which altered his whole life and were connected withierre, with fame, with the girl at the window, the oak, and woman'seauty and love. And if anyone came into his room at such moments heas particularly cold, stern, and above all unpleasantly logical.
	"My dear," Princess Mary entering at such a moment would say,little Nicholas can't go out today, it's very cold."
	"If it were hot," Prince Andrew would reply at such times very drylyo his sister, "he could go out in his smock, but as it is cold heust wear warm clothes, which were designed for that purpose. Thats what follows from the fact that it is cold; and not that a childho needs fresh air should remain at home," he would add withxtreme logic, as if punishing someone for those secret illogicalmotions that stirred within him.
	At such moments Princess Mary would think how intellectual workries men up.BK6|CH4
	CHAPTER IV
	Prince Andrew arrived in Petersburg in August, 1809. It was the timehen the youthful Speranski was at the zenith of his fame and hiseforms were being pushed forward with the greatest energy. Thatame August the Emperor was thrown from his caleche, injured hiseg, and remained three weeks at Peterhof, receiving Speranski everyay and no one else. At that time the two famous decrees were beingrepared that so agitated society- abolishing court ranks andntroducing examinations to qualify for the grades of Collegiatessessor and State Councilor- and not merely these but a whole stateonstitution, intended to change the existing order of government inussia: legal, administrative, and financial, from the Council oftate down to the district tribunals. Now those vague liberal dreamsith which the Emperor Alexander had ascended the throne, and which head tried to put into effect with the aid of his associates,zartoryski, Novosiltsev, Kochubey, and Strogonov- whom he himselfn jest had called his Comite de salut public- were taking shape andeing realized.
	Now all these men were replaced by Speranski on the civil side,nd Arakcheev on the military. Soon after his arrival Prince Andrew,s a gentleman of the chamber, presented himself at court and at aevee. The Emperor, though he met him twice, did not favor him with single word. It had always seemed to Prince Andrew before that heas antipathetic to the Emperor and that the latter disliked hisace and personality generally, and in the cold, repellent glancehe Emperor gave him, he now found further confirmation of thisurmise. The courtiers explained the Emperor's neglect of him by Hisajesty's displeasure at Bolkonski's not having served since 1805.
	"I know myself that one cannot help one's sympathies andntipathies," thought Prince Andrew, "so it will not do to presenty proposal for the reform of the army regulations to the Emperorersonally, but the project will speak for itself."
	He mentioned what he had written to an old field marshal, a friendf his father's. The field marshal made an appointment to see him,eceived him graciously, and promised to inform the Emperor. A feways later Prince Andrew received notice that he was to go to seehe Minister of War, Count Arakcheev.
	On the appointed day Prince Andrew entered Count Arakcheev's waitingoom at nine in the morning.
	He did not know Arakcheev personally, had never seen him, and all head heard of him inspired him with but little respect for the man.
	"He is Minister of War, a man trusted by the Emperor, and I need notoncern myself about his personal qualities: he has beenommissioned to consider my project, so he alone can get itdopted," thought Prince Andrew as he waited among a number ofmportant and unimportant people in Count Arakcheev's waiting room.
	During his service, chiefly as an adjutant, Prince Andrew had seenhe anterooms of many important men, and the different types of suchooms were well known to him. Count Arakcheev's anteroom had quite apecial character. The faces of the unimportant people awaitingheir turn for an audience showed embarrassment and servility; theaces of those of higher rank expressed a common feeling ofwkwardness, covered by a mask of unconcern and ridicule ofhemselves, their situation, and the person for whom they wereaiting. Some walked thoughtfully up and down, others whispered andaughed. Prince Andrew heard the nickname "Sila Andreevich" and theords, "Uncle will give it to us hot," in reference to Countrakcheev. One general (an important personage), evidently feelingffended at having to wait so long, sat crossing and uncrossing hisegs and smiling contemptuously to himself.
	But the moment the door opened one feeling alone appeared on allaces- that of fear. Prince Andrew for the second time asked thedjutant on duty to take in his name, but received an ironical looknd was told that his turn would come in due course. After some othersad been shown in and out of the minister's room by the adjutant onuty, an officer who struck Prince Andrew by his humiliated andrightened air was admitted at that terrible door. This officer'sudience lasted a long time. Then suddenly the grating sound of aarsh voice was heard from the other side of the door, and thefficer- with pale face and trembling lips- came out and passedhrough the waiting room, clutching his head.
	After this Prince Andrew was conducted to the door and the officern duty said in a whisper, "To the right, at the window."
	Prince Andrew entered a plain tidy room and saw at the table a manf forty with a long waist, a long closely cropped head, deeprinkles, scowling brows above dull greenish-hazel eyes and anverhanging red nose. Arakcheev turned his head toward him withoutooking at him.
	"What is your petition?" asked Arakcheev.
	"I am not petitioning, your excellency," returned Prince Andrewuietly.
	Arakcheev's eyes turned toward him.
	"Sit down," said he. "Prince Bolkonski?"
	"I am not petitioning about anything. His Majesty the Emperor haseigned to send your excellency a project submitted by me..."
	"You see, my dear sir, I have read your project," interruptedrakcheev, uttering only the first words amiably and then- againithout looking at Prince Andrew- relapsing gradually into a tone ofrumbling contempt. "You are proposing new military laws? There areany laws but no one to carry out the old ones. Nowadays everybodyesigns laws, it is easier writing than doing."
	"I came at His Majesty the Emperor's wish to learn from yourxcellency how you propose to deal with the memorandum I haveresented," said Prince Andrew politely.
	"I have endorsed a resolution on your memorandum and sent it tohe committee. I do not approve of it," said Arakcheev, rising andaking a paper from his writing table. "Here!" and he handed it torince Andrew.
	Across the paper was scrawled in pencil, without capital letters,isspelled, and without punctuation: "Unsoundly constructed becauseesembles an imitation of the French military code and from therticles of War needlessly deviating."
	"To what committee has the memorandum been referred?" inquiredrince Andrew.
	"To the Committee on Army Regulations, and I have recommended thatour honor should be appointed a member, but without a salary."
	Prince Andrew smiled.
	"I don't want one."
	"A member without salary," repeated Arakcheev. "I have theonor... Eh! Call the next one! Who else is there?" he shouted, bowingo Prince Andrew.BK6|CH5
	CHAPTER V
	While waiting for the announcement of his appointment to theommittee Prince Andrew looked up his former acquaintances,articularly those he knew to be in power and whose aid he might need.n Petersburg he now experienced the same feeling he had had on theve of a battle, when troubled by anxious curiosity and irresistiblyttracted to the ruling circles where the future, on which the fate ofillions depended, was being shaped. From the irritation of thelder men, the curiosity of the uninitiated. the reserve of thenitiated, the hurry and preoccupation of everyone, and thennumerable committees and commissions of whose existence he learnedvery day, he felt that now, in 1809, here in Petersburg a vastivil conflict was in preparation, the commander in chief of which was mysterious person he did not know, but who was supposed to be aan of genius- Speranski. And this movement of reconstruction of whichrince Andrew had a vague idea, and Speranski its chief promoter,egan to interest him so keenly that the question of the armyegulations quickly receded to a secondary place in his consciousness.
	Prince Andrew was most favorably placed to secure good receptionn the highest and most diverse Petersburg circles of the day. Theeforming party cordially welcomed and courted him, the first placeecause he was reputed to be clever and very well read, and secondlyecause by liberating his serfs he had obtained the reputation ofeing a liberal. The party of the old and dissatisfied, who censuredhe innovations, turned to him expecting his sympathy in theirisapproval of the reforms, simply because he was the son of hisather. The feminine society world welcomed him gladly, because he wasich, distinguished, a good match, and almost a newcomer, with aalo of romance on account of his supposed death and the tragic lossf his wife. Besides this the general opinion of all who had known himreviously was that he had greatly improved during these last fiveears, having softened and grown more manly, lost his formerffectation, pride, and contemptuous irony, and acquired theerenity that comes with years. People talked about him, werenterested in him, and wanted to meet him.
	The day after his interview with Count Arakcheev, Prince Andrewpent the evening at Count Kochubey's. He told the count of hisnterview with Sila Andreevich (Kochubey spoke of Arakcheev by thatickname with the same vague irony Prince Andrew had noticed in theinister of War's anteroom).
	"Mon cher, even in this case you can't do without Michaelikhaylovich Speranski. He manages everything. I'll speak to him. Heas promised to come this evening."
	"What has Speranski to do with the army regulations?" asked Princendrew.
	Kochubey shook his head smilingly, as if surprised at Bolkonski'simplicity.
	"We were talking to him about you a few days ago," Kochubeyontinued, "and about your freed plowmen."
	"Oh, is it you, Prince, who have freed your serfs?" said an oldan of Catherine's day, turning contemptuously toward Bolkonski.
	"It was a small estate that brought in no profit," replied Princendrew, trying to extenuate his action so as not to irritate the oldan uselessly.
	"Afraid of being late..." said the old man, looking at Kochubey.
	"There's one thing I don't understand," he continued. "Who will plowhe land if they are set free? It is easy to write laws, but difficulto rule.... Just the same as now- I ask you, Count- who will beeads of the departments when everybody has to pass examinations?"
	"Those who pass the examinations, I suppose," replied Kochubey,rossing his legs and glancing round.
	"Well, I have Pryanichnikov serving under me, a splendid man, ariceless man, but he's sixty. Is he to go up for examination?"
	"Yes, that's a difficulty, as education is not at all general,ut..."
	Count Kochubey did not finish. He rose, took Prince Andrew by therm, and went to meet a tall, bald, fair man of about forty with aarge open forehead and a long face of unusual and peculiar whiteness,ho was just entering. The newcomer wore a blue swallow-tail coat with cross suspended from his neck and a star on his left breast. Itas Speranski. Prince Andrew recognized him at once, and felt ahrob within him, as happens at critical moments of life. Whether itas from respect, envy, or anticipation, he did not know.peranski's whole figure was of a peculiar type that made him easilyecognizable. In the society in which Prince Andrew lived he had nevereen anyone who together with awkward and clumsy gestures possesseduch calmness and self-assurance; he had never seen so resolute yetentle an expression as that in those half-closed, rather humidyes, or so firm a smile that expressed nothing; nor had he heard such refined, smooth, soft voice; above all he had never seen suchelicate whiteness of face or hands- hands which were broad, butery plump, soft, and white. Such whiteness and softness Prince Andrewad only seen on the faces of soldiers who had been long inospital. This was Speranski, Secretary of State, reporter to themperor and his companion at Erfurt, where he had more than once metnd talked with Napoleon.
	Speranski did not shift his eyes from one face to another aseople involuntarily do on entering a large company and was in nourry to speak. He spoke slowly, with assurance that he would beistened to, and he looked only at the person with whom he wasonversing.
	Prince Andrew followed Speranski's every word and movement witharticular attention. As happens to some people, especially to men whoudge those near to them severely, he always on meeting anyone new-specially anyone whom, like Speranski, he knew by reputation-xpected to discover in him the perfection of human qualities.
	Speranski told Kochubey he was sorry he had been unable to comeooner as he had been detained at the palace. He did not say thathe Emperor had kept him, and Prince Andrew noticed this affectationf modesty. When Kochubey introduced Prince Andrew, Speranski slowlyurned his eyes to Bolkonski with his customary smile and looked atim in silence.
	"I am very glad to make your acquaintance. I had heard of you, asveryone has," he said after a pause.
	Kochubey said a few words about the reception Arakcheev had givenolkonski. Speranski smiled more markedly.
	"The chairman of the Committee on Army Regulations is my good friendonsieur Magnitski," he said, fully articulating every word andyllable, "and if you like I can put you in touch with him." He pausedt the full stop. "I hope you will find him sympathetic and ready too-operate in promoting all that is reasonable."
	A circle soon formed round Speranski, and the old man who had talkedbout his subordinate Pryanichnikov addressed a question to him.
	Prince Andrew without joining in the conversation watched everyovement of Speranski's: this man, not long since an insignificantivinity student, who now, Bolkonski thought, held in his hands- thoselump white hands- the fate of Russia. Prince Andrew was struck by thextraordinarily disdainful composure with which Speranski answered theld man. He appeared to address condescending words to him from anmmeasurable height. When the old man began to speak too loud,peranski smiled and said he could not judge of the advantage orisadvantage of what pleased the sovereign.
	Having talked for a little while in the general circle, Speranskiose and coming up to Prince Andrew took him along to the other end ofhe room. It was clear that he thought it necessary to interestimself in Bolkonski.
	"I had no chance to talk with you, Prince, during the animatedonversation in which that venerable gentleman involved me," he saidith a mildly contemptuous smile, as if intimating by that smilehat he and Prince Andrew understood the insignificance of theeople with whom he had just been talking. This flattered Princendrew. "I have known of you for a long time: first from your actionith regard to your serfs, a first example, of which it is veryesirable that there should be more imitators; and secondly becauseou are one of those gentlemen of the chamber who have notonsidered themselves offended by the new decree concerning theanks allotted to courtiers, which is causing so much gossip andittle-tattle."
	"No," said Prince Andrew, "my father did not wish me to takedvantage of the privilege. I began the service from the lower grade."
	"Your father, a man of the last century, evidently stands aboveur contemporaries who so condemn this measure which merelyeestablishes natural justice."
	"I think, however, that these condemnations have some ground,"eturned Prince Andrew, trying to resist Speranski's influence, ofhich he began to be conscious. He did not like to agree with him inverything and felt a wish to contradict. Though he usually spokeasily and well, he felt a difficulty in expressing himself nowhile talking with Speranski. He was too much absorbed in observinghe famous man's personality.
	"Grounds of personal ambition maybe," Speranski put in quietly.
	"And of state interest to some extent," said Prince Andrew.
	"What do you mean?" asked Speranski quietly, lowering his eyes.
	"I am an admirer of Montesquieu," replied Prince Andrew, "and hisdea that le principe des monarchies est l'honneur me paraitncontestable. Certains droits et privileges de la noblesse mearaissent etre des moyens de soutenir ce sentiment."*
	*"The principle of monarchies is honor seems to me incontestable.ertain rights and privileges for the aristocracy appear to me a meansf maintaining that sentiment."
	The smile vanished from Speranski's white face, which was muchmproved by the change. Probably Prince Andrew's thought interestedim.
	"Si vous envisagez la question sous ce point de vue,"* he began,ronouncing French with evident difficulty, and speaking even slowerhan in Russian but quite calmly.
	*"If you regard the question from that point of view."
	Speranski went on to say that honor, l'honeur, cannot be upheld byrivileges harmful to the service; that honor, l'honneur, is either negative concept of not doing what is blameworthy or it is aource of emulation in pursuit of commendation and rewards, whichecognize it. His arguments were concise, simple, and clear.
	"An institution upholding honor, the source of emulation, is oneimilar to the Legion d'honneur of the great Emperor Napoleon, notarmful but helpful to the success of the service, but not a classr court privilege."
	"I do not dispute that, but it cannot be denied that courtrivileges have attained the same end," returned Prince Andrew. "Everyourtier considers himself bound to maintain his position worthily."
	"Yet you do not care to avail yourself of the privilege, Prince,"aid Speranski, indicating by a smile that he wished to finish amiablyn argument which was embarrassing for his companion. "If you willo me the honor of calling on me on Wednesday," he added, "I will,fter talking with Magnitski, let you know what may interest you,nd shall also have the pleasure of a more detailed chat with you."
	Closing his eyes, he bowed a la francaise, without taking leave, andrying to attract as little attention as possible, he left the room.BK6|CH6
	CHAPTER VI
	During the first weeks of his stay in Petersburg Prince Andrewelt the whole trend of thought he had formed during his life ofeclusion quite overshadowed by the trifling cares that engrossedim in that city.
	On returning home in the evening he would jot down in his notebookour or five necessary calls or appointments for certain hours. Theechanism of life, the arrangement of the day so as to be in timeverywhere, absorbed the greater part of his vital energy. He didothing, did not even think or find time to think, but only talked,nd talked successfully, of what he had thought while in the country.
	He sometimes noticed with dissatisfaction that he repeated theame remark on the same day in different circles. But he was so busyor whole days together that he had no time to notice that he washinking of nothing.
	As he had done on their first meeting at Kochubey's, Speranskiroduced a strong impression on Prince Andrew on the Wednesday, whene received him tete-a-tate at his own house and talked to him longnd confidentially.
	To Bolkonski so many people appeared contemptible andnsignificant creatures, and he so longed to find in someone theiving ideal of that perfection toward which he strove, that heeadily believed that in Speranski he had found this ideal of aerfectly rational and virtuous man. Had Speranski sprung from theame class as himself and possessed the same breeding andraditions, Bolkonski would soon have discovered his weak, human,nheroic sides; but as it was, Speranski's strange and logical turn ofind inspired him with respect all the more because he did not quitenderstand him. Moreover, Speranski, either because he appreciated thether's capacity or because he considered it necessary to win him tois side, showed off his dispassionate calm reasonableness beforerince Andrew and flattered him with that subtle flattery which goesand in hand with self-assurance and consists in a tacit assumptionhat one's companion is the only man besides oneself capable ofnderstanding the folly of the rest of mankind and theeasonableness and profundity of one's own ideas.
	During their long conversation on Wednesday evening, Speranskiore than once remarked: "We regard everything that is above theommon level of rooted custom..." or, with a smile: "But we want theolves to be fed and the sheep to be safe..." or: "They cannotnderstand this..." and all in a way that seemed to say: "We, yound I, understand what they are and who we are."
	This first long conversation with Speranski only strengthened inrince Andrew the feeling he had experienced toward him at their firsteeting. He saw in him a remarkable, clear-thinking man of vastntellect who by his energy and persistence had attained power,hich he was using solely for the welfare of Russia. In Princendrew's eyes Speranski was the man he would himself have wished toe- one who explained all the facts of life reasonably, consideredmportant only what was rational, and was capable of applying thetandard of reason to everything. Everything seemed so simple andlear in Speranski's exposition that Prince Andrew involuntarilygreed with him about everything. If he replied and argued, it wasnly because he wished to maintain his independence and not submito Speranski's opinions entirely. Everything was right andverything was as it should be: only one thing disconcerted Princendrew. This was Speranski's cold, mirrorlike look, which did notllow one to penetrate to his soul, and his delicate white hands,hich Prince Andrew involuntarily watched as one does watch theands of those who possess power. This mirrorlike gaze and thoseelicate hands irritated Prince Andrew, he knew not why. He wasnpleasantly struck, too, by the excessive contempt for others that hebserved in Speranski, and by the diversity of lines of argument hesed to support his opinions. He made use of every kind of mentalevice, except analogy, and passed too boldly, it seemed to Princendrew, from one to another. Now he would take up the position of aractical man and condemn dreamers; now that of a satirist, andaugh ironically at his opponents; now grow severely logical, oruddenly rise to the realm of metaphysics. (This last resource was onee very frequently employed.) He would transfer a question toetaphysical heights, pass on to definitions of space, time, andhought, and, having deduced the refutation he needed, would againescend to the level of the original discussion.
	In general the trait of Speranski's mentality which struck Princendrew most was his absolute and unshakable belief in the power anduthority of reason. It was evident that the thought could never occuro him which to Prince Andrew seemed so natural, namely, that it isfter all impossible to express all one thinks; and that he hadever felt the doubt, "Is not all I think and believe nonsense?" Andt was just this peculiarity of Speranski's mind that particularlyttracted Prince Andrew.
	During the first period of their acquaintance Bolkonski felt aassionate admiration for him similar to that which he had once feltor Bonaparte. The fact that Speranski was the son of a villageriest, and that stupid people might meanly despise him on accountf his humble origin (as in fact many did), caused Prince Andrew toherish his sentiment for him the more, and unconsciously totrengthen it.
	On that first evening Bolkonski spent with him, having mentioned theommission for the Revision of the Code of Laws, Speranski told himarcastically that the Commission had existed for a hundred andifty years, had cost millions, and had done nothing except thatosenkampf had stuck labels on the corresponding paragraphs of theifferent codes.
	"And that is all the state has for the millions it has spent,"aid he. "We want to give the Senate new juridical powers, but we haveo laws. That is why it is a sin for men like you, Prince, not toerve in these times!"
	Prince Andrew said that for that work an education inurisprudence was needed which he did not possess.
	"But nobody possesses it, so what would you have? It is a viciousircle from which we must break a way out."
	A week later Prince Andrew was a member of the Committee on Armyegulations and- what he had not at all expected- was chairman of aection of the committee for the revision of the laws. Atperanski's request he took the first part of the Civil Code thatas being drawn up and, with the aid of the Code Napoleon and thenstitutes of Justinian, he worked at formulating the section onersonal Rights.BK6|CH7
	CHAPTER VII
	Nearly two years before this, in 1808, Pierre on returning toetersburg after visiting his estates had involuntarily foundimself in a leading position among the Petersburg Freemasons. Herranged dining and funeral lodge meetings, enrolled new members,nd busied himself uniting various lodges and acquiring authenticharters. He gave money for the erection of temples and supplementeds far as he could the collection of alms, in regard to which theajority of members were stingy and irregular. He supported almostinglehanded a poorhouse the order had founded in Petersburg.
	His life meanwhile continued as before, with the same infatuationsnd dissipations. He liked to dine and drink well, and though heonsidered it immoral and humiliating could not resist the temptationsf the bachelor circles in which he moved.
	Amid the turmoil of his activities and distractions, however, Pierret the end of a year began to feel that the more firmly he tried toest upon it, the more Masonic ground on which he stood gave way underim. At the same time he felt that the deeper the ground sank underim the closer bound he involuntarily became to the order. When he hadoined the Freemasons he had experienced the feeling of one whoonfidently steps onto the smooth surface of a bog. When he put hisoot down it sank in. To make quite sure of the firmness the ground,e put his other foot down and sank deeper still, became stuck int, and involuntarily waded knee-deep in the bog.
	Joseph Alexeevich was not in Petersburg- he had of late stoodside from the affairs of the Petersburg lodges, and lived almostntirely in Moscow. All the members of the lodges were men Pierre knewn ordinary life, and it was difficult for him to regard them merelys Brothers in Freemasonry and not as Prince B. or Ivan Vasilevich D.,hom he knew in society mostly as weak and insignificant men. Underhe Masonic aprons and insignia he saw the uniforms and decorations athich they aimed in ordinary life. Often after collecting alms, andeckoning up twenty to thirty rubles received for the most part inromises from a dozen members, of whom half were as well able to pays himself, Pierre remembered the Masonic vow in which each Brotherromised to devote all his belongings to his neighbor, and doubts onhich he tried not to dwell arose in his soul.
	He divided the Brothers he knew into four categories. In the firste put those who did not take an active part in the affairs of theodges or in human affairs, but were exclusively occupied with theystical science of the order: with questions of the threefoldesignation of God, the three primordial elements- sulphur, mercury,nd salt- or the meaning of the square and all the various figuresf the temple of Solomon. Pierre respected this class of Brothers tohich the elder ones chiefly belonged, including, Pierre thought,oseph Alexeevich himself, but he did not share their interests. Hiseart was not in the mystical aspect of Freemasonry.
	In the second category Pierre reckoned himself and others likeim, seeking and vacillating, who had not yet found in Freemasonry atraight and comprehensible path, but hoped to do so.
	In the third category he included those Brothers (the majority)ho saw nothing in Freemasonry but the external forms anderemonies, and prized the strict performance of these forms withoutroubling about their purport or significance. Such were Willarski andven the Grand Master of the principal lodge.
	Finally, to the fourth category also a great many Brothers belonged,articularly those who had lately joined. These according toierre's observations were men who had no belief in anything, noresire for anything, but joined the Freemasons merely to associateith the wealthy young Brothers who were influential through theironnections or rank, and of whom there were very many in the lodge.
	Pierre began to feel dissatisfied with what he was doing.reemasonry, at any rate as he saw it here, sometimes seemed to himased merely on externals. He did not think of doubting Freemasonrytself, but suspected that Russian Masonry had taken a wrong pathnd deviated from its original principles. And so toward the end ofhe year he went abroad to be initiated into the higher secrets of therder.
	In the summer of 1809 Pierre returned to Petersburg. Ourreemasons knew from correspondence with those abroad that Bezukhovad obtained the confidence of many highly placed persons, had beennitiated into many mysteries, had been raised to a higher grade,nd was bringing back with him much that might conduce to thedvantage of the Masonic cause in Russia. The Petersburg Freemasonsll came to see him, tried to ingratiate themselves with him, and iteemed to them all that he was preparing something for them andoncealing it.
	A solemn meeting of the lodge of the second degree was convened,t which Pierre promised to communicate to the Petersburg Brothershat he had to deliver to them from the highest leaders of theirrder. The meeting was a full one. After the usual ceremonies Pierreose and began his address.
	"Dear Brothers," he began, blushing and stammering, with a writtenpeech in his hand, "it is not sufficient to observe our mysteriesn the seclusion of our lodge- we must act- act! We are drowsing,ut we must act." Pierre raised his notebook and began to read.
	"For the dissemination of pure truth and to secure the triumph ofirtue," he read, "we must cleanse men from prejudice, diffuserinciples in harmony with the spirit of the times, undertake theducation of the young, unite ourselves in indissoluble bonds with theisest men, boldly yet prudently overcome superstitions, infidelity,nd folly, and form of those devoted to us a body linked together bynity of purpose and possessed of authority and power.
	"To attain this end we must secure a preponderance of virtue overice and must endeavor to secure that the honest man may, even in thisorld, receive a lasting reward for his virtue. But in these greatndeavors we are gravely hampered by the political institutions ofoday. What is to be done in these circumstances? To favorevolutions, overthrow everything, repel force by force?... No! We areery far from that. Every violent reform deserves censure, for ituite fails to remedy evil while men remain what they are, and alsoecause wisdom needs no violence.
	"The whole plan of our order should be based on the idea ofreparing men of firmness and virtue bound together by unity ofonviction- aiming at the punishment of vice and folly, andatronizing talent and virtue: raising worthy men from the dust andttaching them to our Brotherhood. Only then will our order have theower unobtrusively to bind the hands of the protectors of disordernd to control them without their being aware of it. In a word, weust found a form of government holding universal sway, which shoulde diffused over the whole world without destroying the bonds ofitizenship, and beside which all other governments can continue inheir customary course and do everything except what impedes the greatim of our order, which is to obtain for virtue the victory over vice.his aim was that of Christianity itself. It taught men to be wise andood and for their own benefit to follow the example and instructionf the best and wisest men.
	"At that time, when everything was plunged in darkness, preachinglone was of course sufficient. The novelty of Truth endowed herith special strength, but now we need much more powerful methods.t is now necessary that man, governed by his senses, should find inirtue a charm palpable to those senses. It is impossible to eradicatehe passions; but we must strive to direct them to a noble aim, and its therefore necessary that everyone should be able to satisfy hisassions within the limits of virtue. Our order should provide meanso that end.
	"As soon as we have a certain number of worthy men in every state,ach of them again training two others and all being closely united,verything will be possible for our order, which has already in secretccomplished much for the welfare of mankind."
	This speech not only made a strong impression, but createdxcitement in the lodge. The majority of the Brothers, seeing in itangerous designs of Illuminism,* met it with a coldness thaturprised Pierre. The Grand Master began answering him, and Pierreegan developing his views with more and more warmth. It was longince there had been so stormy a meeting. Parties were formed, someccusing Pierre of Illuminism, others supporting him. At thateeting he was struck for the first time by the endless variety ofen's minds, which prevents a truth from ever presenting itselfdentically to two persons. Even those members who seemed to be on hiside understood him in their own way with limitations andlterations he could not agree to, as what he always wanted most waso convey his thought to others just as he himself understood it.
	*The Illuminati sought to substitute republican for monarchicalnstitutions.
	At the end of the meeting the Grand Master with irony and ill-willeproved Bezukhov for his vehemence and said it was not love of virtuelone, but also a love of strife that had moved him in the dispute.ierre did not answer him and asked briefly whether his proposal woulde accepted. He was told that it would not, and without waiting forhe usual formalities he left the lodge and went home.BK6|CH8
	CHAPTER VIII
	Again Pierre was overtaken by the depression he so dreaded. Forhree days after the delivery of his speech at the lodge he lay on aofa at home receiving no one and going nowhere.
	It was just then that he received a letter from his wife, whomplored him to see her, telling him how grieved she was about him andow she wished to devote her whole life to him.
	At the end of the letter she informed him that in a few days sheould return to Petersburg from abroad.
	Following this letter one of the Masonic Brothers whom Pierreespected less than the others forced his way in to see him and,urning the conversation upon Pierre's matrimonial affairs, by wayf fraternal advice expressed the opinion that his severity to hisife was wrong and that he was neglecting one of the first rules ofreemasonry by not forgiving the penitent.
	At the same time his mother-in-law, Prince Vasili's wife, sent toim imploring him to come if only for a few minutes to discuss aost important matter. Pierre saw that there was a conspiracygainst him and that they wanted to reunite him with his wife, andn the mood he then was, this was not even unpleasant to him.othing mattered to him. Nothing in life seemed to him of muchmportance, and under the influence of the depression that possessedim he valued neither his liberty nor his resolution to punish hisife.
	"No one is right and no one is to blame; so she too is not tolame," he thought.
	If he did not at once give his consent to a reunion with his wife,t was only because in his state of depression he did not feel able toake any step. Had his wife come to him, he would not have turneder away. Compared to what preoccupied him, was it not a matter ofndifference whether he lived with his wife or not?
	Without replying either to his wife or his mother-in-law, Pierreate one night prepared for a journey and started for Moscow to seeoseph Alexeevich. This is what he noted in his diary:
	Moscow, 17th November
	I have just returned from my benefactor, and hasten to write downhat I have experienced. Joseph Alexeevich is living poorly and hasor three years been suffering from a painful disease of theladder. No one has ever heard him utter a groan or a word ofomplaint. From morning till late at night, except when he eats hisery plain food, he is working at science. He received me graciouslynd made me sit down on the bed on which he lay. I made the sign ofhe Knights of the East and of Jerusalem, and he responded in the sameanner, asking me with a mild smile what I had learned and gained inhe Prussian and Scottish lodges. I told him everything as best Iould, and told him what I had proposed to our Petersburg lodge, ofhe bad reception I had encountered, and of my rupture with therothers. Joseph Alexeevich, having remained silent and thoughtful for good while, told me his view of the matter, which at once lit up fore my whole past and the future path I should follow. He surprisede by asking whether I remembered the threefold aim of the order:1) The preservation and study of the mystery. (2) The purificationnd reformation of oneself for its reception, and (3) Themprovement of the human race by striving for such purification. Whichs the principal aim of these three? Certainly self-reformation andelf-purification. Only to this aim can we always strive independentlyf circumstances. But at the same time just this aim demands thereatest efforts of us; and so, led astray by pride, losing sight ofhis aim, we occupy ourselves either with the mystery which in ourmpurity we are unworthy to receive, or seek the reformation of theuman race while ourselves setting an example of baseness androfligacy. Illuminism is not a pure doctrine, just because it isttracted by social activity and puffed up by pride. On this groundoseph Alexeevich condemned my speech and my whole activity, and inhe depth of my soul I agreed with him. Talking of my family affairse said to me, "the chief duty of a true Mason, as I have told you,ies in perfecting himself. We often think that by removing all theifficulties of our life we shall more quickly reach our aim, but onhe contrary, my dear sir, it is only in the midst of worldly careshat we can attain our three chief aims: (1) Self-knowledge- for manan only know himself by comparison, (2) Self-perfecting, which cannly be attained by conflict, and (3) The attainment of the chiefirtue- love of death. Only the vicissitudes of life can show us itsanity and develop our innate love of death or of rebirth to a newife." These words are all the more remarkable because, in spite ofis great physical sufferings, Joseph Alexeevich is never weary ofife though he loves death, for which- in spite of the purity andoftiness of his inner man- he does not yet feel himselfufficiently prepared. My benefactor then explained to me fully theeaning of the Great Square of creation and pointed out to me that theumbers three and seven are the basis of everything. He advised me noto avoid intercourse with the Petersburg Brothers, but to take up onlyecond-grade posts in the lodge, to try, while diverting therothers from pride, to turn them toward the true pathelf-knowledge and self-perfecting. Besides this he advised me foryself personally above all to keep a watch over myself, and to thatnd he gave me a notebook, the one I am now writing in and in which will in future note down all my actions.
	Petersburg, 23rd November
	I am again living with my wife. My mother-in-law came to me in tearsnd said that Helene was here and that she implored me to hear her;hat she was innocent and unhappy at my desertion, and much more. Inew that if I once let myself see her I should not have strength too on refusing what she wanted. In my perplexity I did not knowhose aid and advice to seek. Had my benefactor been here he wouldave told me what to do. I went to my room and reread Josephlexeevich's letters and recalled my conversations with him, andeduced from it all that I ought not to refuse a suppliant, andught to reach a helping hand to everyone- especially to one solosely bound to me- and that I must bear my cross. But if I forgiveer for the sake of doing right, then let union with her have only apiritual aim. That is what I decided, and what I wrote to Josephlexeevich. I told my wife that I begged her to forget the past, toorgive me whatever wrong I may have done her, and that I hadothing to forgive. It gave me joy to tell her this. She need not knowow hard it was for me to see her again. I have settled on the upperloor of this big house and am experiencing a happy feeling ofegeneration.BK6|CH9
	CHAPTER IX
	At that time, as always happens, the highest society that met atourt and at the grand balls was divided into several circles, eachith its own particular tone. The largest of these was the Frenchircle of the Napoleonic alliance, the circle of Count Rumyantsevnd Caulaincourt. In this group Helene, as soon as she had settledn Petersburg with her husband, took a very prominent place. She wasisited by the members of the French embassy and by many belongingo that circle and noted for their intellect and polished manners.
	Helene had been at Erfurt during the famous meeting of themperors and had brought from there these connections with theapoleonic notabilities. At Erfurt her success had been brilliant.apoleon himself had noticed her in the theater and said of her:C'est un superbe animal."* Her success as a beautiful and elegantoman did not surprise Pierre, for she had become even handsomerhan before. What did surprise him was that during these last twoears his wife had succeeded in gaining the reputation "d' une femmeharmante, aussi spirituelle que belle."*[2] The distinguishedrince de Ligne wrote her eight-page letters. Bilibin saved up hispigrams to produce them in Countess Bezukhova's presence. To beeceived in the Countess Bezukhova's salon was regarded as a diplomaf intellect. Young men read books before attending Helene's evenings,o have something to say in her salon, and secretaries of the embassy,nd even ambassadors, confided diplomatic secrets to her, so that in aay Helene was a power. Pierre, who knew she was very stupid,ometimes attended, with a strange feeling of perplexity and fear, hervenings and dinner parties, where politics, poetry, and philosophyere discussed. At these parties his feelings were like those of aonjuror who always expects his trick to be found out at any moment.ut whether because stupidity was just what was needed to run such aalon, or because those who were deceived found pleasure in theeception, at any rate it remained unexposed and Helene Bezukhova'seputation as a lovely and clever woman became so firmly establishedhat she could say the emptiest and stupidest things and everybodyould go into raptures over every word of hers and look for a profoundeaning in it of which she herself had no conception.
	*"That's a superb animal."
	*[2] "Of a charming woman, as witty as she is lovely."
	Pierre was just the husband needed for a brilliant society woman. Heas that absent-minded crank, a grand seigneur husband who was in none's way, and far from spoiling the high tone and generalmpression of the drawing room, he served, by the contrast heresented to her, as an advantageous background to his elegant andactful wife. Pierre during the last two years, as a result of hisontinual absorption in abstract interests and his sincere contemptor all else, had acquired in his wife's circle, which did notnterest him, that air of unconcern, indifference, and benevolenceoward all, which cannot be acquired artificially and thereforenspires involuntary respect. He entered his wife's drawing room asne enters a theater, was acquainted with everybody, equally pleasedo see everyone, and equally indifferent to them all. Sometimes heoined in a conversation which interested him and, regardless ofhether any "gentlemen of the embassy" were present or not,ispingly expressed his views, which were sometimes not at all inccord with the accepted tone of the moment. But the general opiniononcerning the queer husband of "the most distinguished woman inetersburg" was so well established that no one took his freakseriously.
	Among the many young men who frequented her house every day, Borisrubetskoy, who had already achieved great success in the service, washe most intimate friend of the Bezukhov household since Helene'seturn from Erfurt. Helene spoke of him as "mon page" and treatedim like a child. Her smile for him was the same as for everybody, butometimes that smile made Pierre uncomfortable. Toward him Borisehaved with a particularly dignified and sad deference. This shade ofeference also disturbed Pierre. He had suffered so painfully threeears before from the mortification to which his wife had subjectedim that he now protected himself from the danger of its repetition,irst by not being a husband to his wife, and secondly by not allowingimself to suspect.
	"No, now that she has become a bluestocking she has finallyenounced her former infatuations," he told himself. "There hasever been an instance of a bluestocking being carried away by affairsf the heart"- a statement which, though gathered from an unknownource, he believed implicitly. Yet strange to say Boris' presencen his wife's drawing room (and he was almost always there) had ahysical effect upon Pierre; it constricted his limbs and destroyedhe unconsciousness and freedom of his movements.
	"What a strange antipathy," thought Pierre, "yet I used to likeim very much."
	In the eyes of the world Pierre was a great gentleman, the ratherlind and absurd husband of a distinguished wife, a clever crank whoid nothing but harmed nobody and was a first-rate, good-naturedellow. But a complex and difficult process of internal developmentas taking place all this time in Pierre's soul, revealing much to himnd causing him many spiritual doubts and joys.BK6|CH10
	CHAPTER X
	Pierre went on with his diary, and this is what he wrote in ituring that time:
	24th November
	Got up at eight, read the Scriptures, then went to my duties. [Byoseph Alexeevich's advice Pierre had entered the service of the statend served on one of the committees.] Returned home for dinner andined alone- the countess had many visitors I do not like. I ate andrank moderately and after dinner copied out some passages for therothers. In the evening I went down to the countess and told aunny story about B., and only remembered that I ought not to haveone so when everybody laughed loudly at it.
	I am going to bed with a happy and tranquil mind. Great God, help meo walk in Thy paths, (1) to conquer anger by calmness andeliberation, (2) to vanquish lust by self-restraint and repulsion,3) to withdraw from worldliness, but not avoid (a) the service of thetate, (b) family duties, (c) relations with my friends, and theanagement of my affairs.
	27th November
	I got up late. On waking I lay long in bed yielding to sloth. O God,elp and strengthen me that I may walk in Thy ways! Read thecriptures, but without proper feeling. Brother Urusov came and wealked about worldly vanities. He told me of the Emperor's newrojects. I began to criticize them, but remembered my rules and myenefactor's words- that a true Freemason should be a zealous workeror the state when his aid is required and a quiet onlooker when notalled on to assist. My tongue is my enemy. Brothers G. V. and O.isited me and we had a preliminary talk about the reception of aew Brother. They laid on me the duty of Rhetor. I feel myself weaknd unworthy. Then our talk turned to the interpretation of theeven pillars and steps of the Temple, the seven sciences, the sevenirtues, the seven vices, and the seven gifts of the Holy Spirit.rother O. was very eloquent. In the evening the admission took place.he new decoration of the Premises contributed much to theagnificence of the spectacle. It was Boris Drubetskoy who wasdmitted. I nominated him and was the Rhetor. A strange feelinggitated me all the time I was alone with him in the dark chamber. Iaught myself harboring a feeling of hatred toward him which Iainly tried to overcome. That is why I should really like to save himrom evil and lead him into the path of truth, but evil thoughts ofim did not leave me. It seemed to me that his object in enteringhe Brotherhood was merely to be intimate and in favor with members ofur lodge. Apart from the fact that he had asked me several timeshether N. and S. were members of our lodge (a question to which Iould not reply) and that according to my observation he isncapable of feeling respect for our holy order and is too preoccupiednd satisfied with the outer man to desire spiritual improvement, Iad no cause to doubt him, but he seemed to me insincere, and allhe time I stood alone with him in the dark temple it seemed to mehat he was smiling contemptuously at my words, and I wished really totab his bare breast with the sword I held to it. I could not beloquent, nor could I frankly mention my doubts to the Brothers and tohe Grand Master. Great Architect of Nature, help me to find therue path out of the labyrinth of lies!
	 After this, three pages were left blank in the diary, and thenhe following was written:
	I have had a long and instructive talk alone with Brother V., whodvised me to hold fast by brother A. Though I am unworthy, much wasevealed to me. Adonai is the name of the creator of the world. Elohims the name of the ruler of all. The third name is the namenutterable which means the All. Talks with Brother V. strengthen,efresh, and support me in the path of virtue. In his presence doubtas no place. The distinction between the poor teachings of mundanecience and our sacred all-embracing teaching is clear to me. Humanciences dissect everything to comprehend it, and kill everything toxamine it. In the holy science of our order all is one, all isnown in its entirety and life. The Trinity- the three elements ofatter- are sulphur, mercury, and salt. Sulphur is of an oily andiery nature; in combination with salt by its fiery nature itrouses a desire in the latter by means of which it attractsercury, seizes it, holds it, and in combination produces otherodies. Mercury is a fluid, volatile, spiritual essence. Christ, theoly Spirit, Him!...
	3rd December
	Awoke late, read the Scriptures but was apathetic. Afterwards wentnd paced up and down the large hall. I wished to meditate, butnstead my imagination pictured an occurrence of four years ago,hen Dolokhov, meeting me in Moscow after our duel, said he hoped Ias enjoying perfect peace of mind in spite of my wife's absence. Athe time I gave him no answer. Now I recalled every detail of thateeting and in my mind gave him the most malevolent and bittereplies. I recollected myself and drove away that thought only when found myself glowing with anger, but I did not sufficientlyepent. Afterwards Boris Drubetskoy came and began relating variousdventures. His coming vexed me from the first, and I said somethingisagreeable to him. He replied. I flared up and said much that wasnpleasant and even rude to him. He became silent, and I recollectedyself only when it was too late. My God, I cannot get on with himt all. The cause of this is my egotism. I set myself above him and soecome much worse than he, for he is lenient to my rudeness while I onhe contrary nourish contempt for him. O God, grant that in hisresence I may rather see my own vileness, and behave so that he tooay benefit. After dinner I fell asleep and as I was drowsing off Ilearly heard a voice saying in my left ear, "Thy day!"
	I dreamed that I was walking in the dark and was suddenly surroundedy dogs, but I went on undismayed. Suddenly a smallish dog seized myeft thigh with its teeth and would not let go. I began to throttle itith my hands. Scarcely had I torn it off before another, a biggerne, began biting me. I lifted it up, but the higher I lifted it theigger and heavier it grew. And suddenly Brother A. came and, takingy arm, led me to a building to enter which we had to pass along aarrow plank. I stepped on it, but it bent and gave way and I began tolamber up a fence which I could scarcely reach with my hands. Afteruch effort I dragged myself up, so that my leg hung down on oneide and my body on the other. I looked round and saw Brother A.tanding on the fence and pointing me to a broad avenue and garden,nd in the garden was a large and beautiful building. I woke up. Oord, great Architect of Nature, help me to tear from myself theseogs- my passions especially the last, which unites in itself thetrength of all the former ones, and aid me to enter that temple ofirtue to a vision of which I attained in my dream.
	7th December
	I dreamed that Joseph Alexeevich was sitting in my house, and that Ias very glad and wished to entertain him. It seemed as if I chatteredncessantly with other people and suddenly remembered that thisould not please him, and I wished to come close to him and embraceim. But as soon as I drew near I saw that his face had changed andrown young, and he was quietly telling me something about theeaching of our order, but so softly that I could not hear it. Then iteemed that we all left the room and something strange happened. Weere sitting or lying on the floor. He was telling me something, and Iished to show him my sensibility, and not listening to what he wasaying I began picturing to myself the condition of my inner man andhe grace of God sanctifying me. And tears came into my eyes, and Ias glad he noticed this. But be looked at me with vexation and jumpedp, breaking off his remarks. I felt abashed and asked whether what head been saying did not concern me; but he did not reply, gave me aind look, and then we suddenly found ourselves in my bedroom wherehere is a double bed. He lay down on the edge of it and I burned withonging to caress him and lie down too. And he said, "Tell merankly what is your chief temptation? Do you know it? I think younow it already." Abashed by this question, I replied that sloth wasy chief temptation. He shook his head incredulously; and even morebashed, I said that though I was living with my wife as he advised, Ias not living with her as her husband. To this he replied that onehould not deprive a wife of one's embraces and gave me tonderstand that that was my duty. But I replied that I should beshamed to do it, and suddenly everything vanished. And I awoke andound in my mind the text from the Gospel: "The life was the lightf men. And the light shineth in darkness; and the darknessomprehended it not." Joseph Alexeevich's face had looked young andright. That day I received a letter from my benefactor in which herote about "conjugal duties."
	9th December
	I had a dream from which I awoke with a throbbing heart. I sawhat I was in Moscow in my house, in the big sitting room, andoseph Alexeevich came in from the drawing room. I seemed to know atnce that the process of regeneration had already taken place inim, and I rushed to meet him. I embraced him and kissed his hands,nd he said, "Hast thou noticed that my face is different?" I lookedt him, still holding him in my arms, and saw that his face was young,ut that he had no hair on his head and his features were quitehanged. And I said, "I should have known you had I met you byhance," and I thought to myself, "Am I telling the truth?" Anduddenly I saw him lying like a dead body; then he gradually recoverednd went with me into my study carrying a large book of sheets ofrawing paper; I said, "I drew that," and he answered by bowing hisead. I opened the book, and on all the pages there were excellentrawings. And in my dream I knew that these drawings represented theove adventures of the soul with its beloved. And on its pages I saw aeautiful representation of a maiden in transparent garments andith a transparent body, flying up to the clouds. And I seemed to knowhat this maiden was nothing else than a representation of the Song ofongs. And looking at those drawings I dreamed I felt that I was doingrong, but could not tear myself away from them. Lord, help me! Myod, if Thy forsaking me is Thy doing, Thy will be done; but if I amyself the cause, teach me what I should do! I shall perish of myebauchery if Thou utterly desertest me!BK6|CH11
	CHAPTER XI
	The Rostovs' monetary affairs had not improved during the twoears they had spent in the country.
	Though Nicholas Rostov had kept firmly to his resolution and wastill serving modestly in an obscure regiment, spendingomparatively little, the way of life at Otradnoe- Mitenka'sanagement of affairs, in particular- was such that the debtsnevitably increased every year. The only resource obviouslyresenting itself to the old count was to apply for an officialost, so he had come to Petersburg to look for one and also, as heaid, to let the lassies enjoy themselves for the last time.
	Soon after their arrival in Petersburg Berg proposed to Vera and wasccepted.
	Though in Moscow the Rostovs belonged to the best society withouthemselves giving it a thought, yet in Petersburg their circle ofcquaintances was a mixed and indefinite one. In Petersburg theyere provincials, and the very people they had entertained in Moscowithout inquiring to what set they belonged, here looked down on them.
	The Rostovs lived in the same hospitable way in Petersburg as inoscow, and the most diverse people met at their suppers. Countryeighbors from Otradnoe, impoverished old squires and their daughters,eronskaya a maid of honor, Pierre Bezukhov, and the son of theiristrict postmaster who had obtained a post in Petersburg. Among theen who very soon became frequent visitors at the Rostovs' house inetersburg were Boris, Pierre whom the count had met in the street andragged home with him, and Berg who spent whole days at the Rostovs'nd paid the eldest daughter, Countess Vera, the attentions a youngan pays when he intends to propose.
	Not in vain had Berg shown everybody his right hand wounded atusterlitz and held a perfectly unnecessary sword in his left. Hearrated that episode so persistently and with so important an airhat everyone believed in the merit and usefulness of his deed, and head obtained two decorations for Austerlitz.
	In the Finnish war he also managed to distinguish himself. He hadicked up the scrap of a grenade that had killed an aide-de-camptanding near the commander in chief and had taken it to hisommander. Just as he had done after Austerlitz, he related thisccurrence at such length and so insistently that everyone againelieved it had been necessary to do this, and he received twoecorations for the Finnish war also. In 1809 he was a captain inhe Guards, wore medals, and held some special lucrative posts inetersburg.
	Though some skeptics smiled when told of Berg's merits, it could note denied that he was a painstaking and brave officer, on excellenterms with his superiors, and a moral young man with a brilliantareer before him and an assured position in society.
	Four years before, meeting a German comrade in the stalls of aoscow theater, Berg had pointed out Vera Rostova to him and hadaid in German, "das soll mein Weib werden,"* and from that moment hadade up his mind to marry her. Now in Petersburg, having consideredhe Rostovs' position and his own, he decided that the time had comeo propose.
	*"That girl shall be my wife."
	Berg's proposal was at first received with a perplexity that was notlattering to him. At first it seemed strange that the son of anbscure Livonian gentleman should propose marriage to a Countessostova; but Berg's chief characteristic was such a naive and goodatured egotism that the Rostovs involuntarily came to think itould be a good thing, since he himself was so firmly convinced thatt was good, indeed excellent. Moreover, the Rostovs' affairs wereeriously embarrassed, as the suitor could not but know; and abovell, Vera was twenty-four, had been taken out everywhere, and thoughhe was certainly good-looking and sensible, no one up to now hadroposed to her. So they gave their consent.
	"You see," said Berg to his comrade, whom he called "friend" onlyecause he knew that everyone has friends, "you see, I have consideredt all, and should not marry if I had not thought it all out or ift were in any way unsuitable. But on the contrary, my papa andamma are now provided for- I have arranged that rent for them inhe Baltic Provinces- and I can live in Petersburg on my pay, and wither fortune and my good management we can get along nicely. I am notarrying for money- I consider that dishonorable- but a wife shouldring her share and a husband his. I have my position in theervice, she has connections and some means. In our times that isorth something, isn't it? But above all, she is a handsome, estimableirl, and she loves me..."
	Berg blushed and smiled.
	"And I love her, because her character is sensible and very good.ow the other sister, though they are the same family, is quiteifferent- an unpleasant character and has not the samentelligence. She is so... you know?... Unpleasant... But myiancee!... Well, you will be coming," he was going to say, "to dine,"ut changed his mind and said "to take tea with us," and quicklyoubling up his tongue he blew a small round ring of tobacco smoke,erfectly embodying his dream of happiness.
	After the first feeling of perplexity aroused in the parents byerg's proposal, the holiday tone of joyousness usual at such timesook possession of the family, but the rejoicing was external andnsincere. In the family's feeling toward this wedding a certainwkwardness and constraint was evident, as if they were ashamed of notaving loved Vera sufficiently and of being so ready to get her offheir hands. The old count felt this most. He would probably have beennable to state the cause of his embarrassment, but it resulted fromhe state of his affairs. He did not know at all how much he had, whatis debts amounted to, or what dowry he could give Vera. When hisaughters were born he had assigned to each of them, for her dowry, anstate with three hundred serfs; but one of these estates hadlready been sold, and the other was mortgaged and the interest souch in arrears that it would have to be sold, so that it wasmpossible to give it to Vera. Nor had he any money.
	Berg had already been engaged a month, and only a week remainedefore the wedding, but the count had not yet decided in his ownind the question of the dowry, nor spoken to his wife about it. Atne time the count thought of giving her the Ryazan estate or ofelling a forest, at another time of borrowing money on a note ofand. A few days before the wedding Berg entered the count's studyarly one morning and, with a pleasant smile, respectfully asked hisuture father-in-law to let him know what Vera's dowry would be. Theount was so disconcerted by this long-foreseen inquiry that withoutonsideration he gave the first reply that came into his head. "I likeour being businesslike about it.... I like it. You shall beatisfied...."
	And patting Berg on the shoulder he got up, wishing to end theonversation. But Berg, smiling pleasantly, explained that if he didot know for certain how much Vera would have and did not receive ateast part of the dowry in advance, he would have to break mattersff.
	"Because, consider, Count- if I allowed myself to marry nowithout having definite means to maintain my wife, I should becting badly...."
	The conversation ended by the count, who wished to be generous ando avoid further importunity, saying that he would give a note of handor eighty thousand rubles. Berg smiled meekly, kissed the count onhe shoulder, and said that he was very grateful, but that it wasmpossible for him to arrange his new life without receiving thirtyhousand in ready money. "Or at least twenty thousand, Count," hedded, "and then a note of hand for only sixty thousand."
	"Yes, yes, all right!" said the count hurriedly. "Only excuse me, myear fellow, I'll give you twenty thousand and a note of hand forighty thousand as well. Yes, yes! Kiss me."BK6|CH12
	CHAPTER XII
	Natasha was sixteen and it was the year 1809, the very year to whichhe had counted on her fingers with Boris after they had kissed fourears ago. Since then she had not seen him. Before Sonya and herother, if Boris happened to be mentioned, she spoke quite freely ofhat episode as of some childish, long-forgotten matter that was notorth mentioning. But in the secret depths of her soul the questionhether her engagement to Boris was a jest or an important, bindingromise tormented her.
	Since Boris left Moscow in 1805 to join the army he had had not seenhe Rostovs. He had been in Moscow several times, and had passedear Otradnoe, but had never been to see them.
	Sometimes it occurred to Natasha that he not wish to see her, andhis conjecture was confirmed by the sad tone in which her elderspoke of him.
	"Nowadays old friends are not remembered," the countess would sayhen Boris was mentioned.
	Anna Mikhaylovna also had of late visited them less frequently,eemed to hold herself with particular dignity, and always spokeapturously and gratefully of the merits of her son and therilliant career on which he had entered. When the Rostovs came toetersburg Boris called on them.
	He drove to their house in some agitation. The memory of Natasha wasis most poetic recollection. But he went with the firm intention ofetting her and her parents feel that the childish relations betweenimself and Natasha could not be binding either on her or on him. Head a brilliant position in society thanks to his intimacy withountess Bezukhova, a brilliant position in the service thanks tohe patronage of an important personage whose complete confidence henjoyed, and he was beginning to make plans for marrying one of theichest heiresses in Petersburg, plans which might very easily beealized. When he entered the Rostovs' drawing room Natasha was in herwn room. When she heard of his arrival she almost ran into therawing room, flushed and beaming with a more than cordial smile.
	Boris remembered Natasha in a short dress, with dark eyes shiningrom under her curls and boisterous, childish laughter, as he hadnown her four years before; and so he was taken aback when quite aifferent Natasha entered, and his face expressed rapturousstonishment. This expression on his face pleased Natasha.
	"Well, do you recognize your little madcap playmate?" asked theountess.
	Boris kissed Natasha's hand and said that he was astonished at thehange in her.
	"How handsome you have grown!"
	"I should think so!" replied Natasha's laughing eyes.
	"And is Papa older?" she asked.
	Natasha sat down and, without joining in Boris' conversation withhe countess, silently and minutely studied her childhood's suitor. Heelt the weight of that resolute and affectionate scrutiny and glancedt her occasionally.
	Boris' uniform, spurs, tie, and the way his hair was brushed werell comme il faut and in the latest fashion. This Natasha noticed atnce. He sat rather sideways in the armchair next to the countess,rranging with his right hand the cleanest of gloves that fitted hiseft hand like a skin, and he spoke with a particularly refinedompression of his lips about the amusements of the highest Petersburgociety, recalling with mild irony old times in Moscow and Moscowcquaintances. It was not accidentally, Natasha felt, that he alluded,hen speaking of the highest aristocracy, to an ambassador's ball head attended, and to invitations he had received from N.N. and S.S.
	All this time Natasha sat silent, glancing up at him from underer brows. This gaze disturbed and confused Boris more and more. Heooked round more frequently toward her, and broke off in what heas saying. He did not stay more than ten minutes, then rose andook his leave. The same inquisitive, challenging, and ratherocking eyes still looked at him. After his first visit Boris saido himself that Natasha attracted him just as much as ever, but thate must not yield to that feeling, because to marry her, a girl almostithout fortune, would mean ruin to his career, while to renew theirormer relations without intending to marry her would be dishonorable.oris made up his mind to avoid meeting Natasha, but despite thatesolution he called again a few days later and began calling oftennd spending whole days at the Rostovs'. It seemed to him that heught to have an explanation with Natasha and tell her that the oldimes must be forgotten, that in spite of everything... she couldot be his wife, that he had no means, and they would never let herarry him. But he failed to do so and felt awkward about entering onuch an explanation. From day to day he became more and morentangled. It seemed to her mother and Sonya that Natasha was inove with Boris as of old. She sang him his favorite songs, showed himer album, making him write in it, did not allow him to allude tohe past, letting it be understood how was the present; and everyay he went away in a fog, without having said what he meant to, andot knowing what he was doing or why he came, or how it would all end.e left off visiting Helene and received reproachful notes from hervery day, and yet he continued to spend whole days with the Rostovs.BK6|CH13
	CHAPTER XIII
	One night when the old countess, in nightcap and dressing jacket,ithout her false curls, and with her poor little knob of hair showingnder her white cotton cap, knelt sighing and groaning on a rug andowing to the ground in prayer, her door creaked and Natasha, alson a dressing jacket with slippers on her bare feet and her hair inurlpapers, ran in. The countess- her prayerful mood dispelled- lookedound and frowned. She was finishing her last prayer: "Can it behat this couch will be my grave?" Natasha, flushed and eager,eeing her mother in prayer, suddenly checked her rush, half sat down,nd unconsciously put out her tongue as if chiding herself. Seeinghat her mother was still praying she ran on tiptoe to the bed and,apidly slipping one little foot against the other, pushed off herlippers and jumped onto the bed the countess had feared mightecome her grave. This couch was high, with a feather bed and fiveillows each smaller than the one below. Natasha jumped on it, sanknto the feather bed, rolled over to the wall, and began snugglingp the bedclothes as she settled down, raising her knees to herhin, kicking out and laughing almost inaudibly, now coveringerself up head and all, and now peeping at her mother. The countessinished her prayers and came to the bed with a stern face, buteeing, that Natasha's head was covered, she smiled in her kind,eak way.
	"Now then, now then!" said she.
	"Mamma, can we have a talk? Yes?" said Natasha. "Now, just one onour throat and another... that'll do!" And seizing her mother roundhe neck, she kissed her on the throat. In her behavior to herother Natasha seemed rough, but she was so sensitive and tactful thatowever she clasped her mother she always managed to do it withouturting her or making her feel uncomfortable or displeased.
	"Well, what is it tonight?" said the mother, having arranged herillows and waited until Natasha, after turning over a couple ofimes, had settled down beside her under the quilt, spread out herrms, and assumed a serious expression.
	These visits of Natasha's at night before the count returned fromis club were one of the greatest pleasures of both mother, andaughter.
	"What is it tonight?- But I have to tell you..."
	Natasha put her hand on her mother's mouth.
	"About Boris... I know," she said seriously; "that's what I haveome about. Don't say it- I know. No, do tell me!" and she removed herand. "Tell me, Mamma! He's nice?"
	"Natasha, you are sixteen. At your age I was married. You sayoris is nice. He is very nice, and I love him like a son. But whathen?... What are you thinking about? You have quite turned hisead, I can see that...."
	As she said this the countess looked round at her daughter.atasha was lying looking steadily straight before her at one of theahogany sphinxes carved on the corners of the bedstead, so that theountess only saw her daughter's face in profile. That face struck hery its peculiarly serious and concentrated expression.
	Natasha was listening and considering.
	"Well, what then?" said she.
	"You have quite turned his head, and why? What do you want of him?ou know you can't marry him."
	"Why not?" said Natasha, without changing her position.
	"Because he is young, because he is poor, because he is aelation... and because you yourself don't love him."
	"How do you know?"
	"I know. It is not right, darling!"
	 "But if I want to..." said Natasha.
	"Leave off talking nonsense," said the countess.
	"But if I want to..."
	"Natasha, I am in earnest..."
	Natasha did not let her finish. She drew the countess' large hand toer, kissed it on the back and then on the palm, then again turnedt over and began kissing first one knuckle, then the space betweenhe knuckles, then the next knuckle, whispering, "January, February,arch, April, May. Speak, Mamma, why don't you say anything? Speak!"aid she, turning to her mother, who was tenderly gazing at heraughter and in that contemplation seemed to have forgotten all shead wished to say.
	"It won't do, my love! Not everyone will understand thisriendship dating from your childish days, and to see him sontimate with you may injure you in the eyes of other young men whoisit us, and above all it torments him for nothing. He may alreadyave found a suitable and wealthy match, and now he's half crazy."
	"Crazy?" repeated Natasha.
	"I'll tell you some things about myself. I had a cousin..."
	"I know! Cyril Matveich... but he is old."
	"He was not always old. But this is what I'll do, Natasha, I'll have talk with Boris. He need not come so often...."
	"Why not, if he likes to?"
	"Because I know it will end in nothing...."
	"How can you know? No, Mamma, don't speak to him! What nonsense!"aid Natasha in the tone of one being deprived of her property. "Well, won't marry, but let him come if he enjoys it and I enjoy it."atasha smiled and looked at her mother. "Not to marry, but justo," she added.
	"How so, my pet?"
	"Just so. There's no need for me to marry him. But... just so."
	"Just so, just so," repeated the countess, and shaking all over, sheent off into a good humored, unexpected, elderly laugh.
	"Don't laugh, stop!" cried Natasha. "You're shaking the whole bed!ou're awfully like me, just such another giggler.... Wait..." and sheeized the countess' hands and kissed a knuckle of the littleinger, saying, "June," and continued, kissing, "July, August," on thether hand. "But, Mamma, is he very much in love? What do you think?as anybody ever so much in love with you? And he's very nice, very,ery nice. Only not quite my taste- he is so narrow, like theining-room clock.... Don't you understand? Narrow, you know- gray,ight gray..."
	"What rubbish you're talking!" said the countess.
	Natasha continued: "Don't you really understand? Nicholas wouldnderstand.... Bezukhov, now, is blue, dark-blue and red, and he isquare."
	"You flirt with him too," said the countess, laughing.
	"No, he is a Freemason, I have found out. He is fine, dark-bluend red.... How can I explain it to you?"
	"Little countess!" the count's voice called from behind the door.You're not asleep?" Natasha jumped up, snatched up her slippers,nd ran barefoot to her own room.
	It was a long time before she could sleep. She kept thinking that none could understand all that she understood and all there was in her.
	"Sonya?" she thought, glancing at that curled-up, sleeping littleitten with her enormous plait of hair. "No, how could she? She'sirtuous. She fell in love with Nicholas and does not wish to knownything more. Even Mamma does not understand. It is wonderful howlever I am and how... charming she is," she went on, speaking oferself in the third person, and imagining it was some very wisean- the wisest and best of men- who was saying it of her. "There isverything, everything in her," continued this man. "She isnusually intelligent, charming... and then she is pretty,ncommonly pretty, and agile- she swims and rides splendidly... ander voice! One can really say it's a wonderful voice!"
	She hummed a scrap from her favorite opera by Cherubini, threwerself on her bed, laughed at the pleasant thought that she wouldmmediately fall asleep, called Dunyasha the maid to put out theandle, and before Dunyasha had left the room had already passednto yet another happier world of dreams, where everything was asight and beautiful as in reality, and even more so because it wasifferent.
	Next day the countess called Boris aside and had a talk with him,fter which he ceased coming to the Rostovs'.BK6|CH14
	CHAPTER XIV
	On the thirty-first of December, New Year's Eve, 1809 - 10 an oldrandee of Catherine's day was giving a ball and midnight supper.he diplomatic corps and the Emperor himself were to be present.
	The grandee's well-known mansion on the English Quay glitteredith innumerable lights. Police were stationed at the brightly litntrance which was carpeted with red baize, and not only gendarmes butozens of police officers and even the police master himself stoodt the porch. Carriages kept driving away and fresh ones arriving,ith red-liveried footmen and footmen in plumed hats. From thearriages emerged men wearing uniforms, stars, and ribbons, whileadies in satin and ermine cautiously descended the carriage stepshich were let down for them with a clatter, and then walked hurriedlynd noiselessly over the baize at the entrance.
	Almost every time a new carriage drove up a whisper ran throughhe crowd and caps were doffed.
	"The Emperor?... No, a minister.... prince... ambassador. Don'tou see the plumes?..." was whispered among the crowd.
	One person, better dressed than the rest, seemed to know everyonend mentioned by name the greatest dignitaries of the day.
	A third of the visitors had already arrived, but the Rostovs, whoere to be present, were still hurrying to get dressed.
	There had been many discussions and preparations for this ball inhe Rostov family, many fears that the invitation would not arrive,hat the dresses would not be ready, or that something would not berranged as it should be.
	Marya Ignatevna Peronskaya, a thin and shallow maid of honor athe court of the Dowager Empress, who was a friend and relation of theountess and piloted the provincial Rostovs in Petersburg highociety, was to accompany them to the ball.
	They were to call for her at her house in the Taurida Gardens at ten'clock, but it was already five minutes to ten, and the girls wereot yet dressed.
	Natasha was going to her first grand ball. She had got up at eighthat morning and had been in a fever of excitement and activity allay. All her powers since morning had been concentrated on ensuringhat they all- she herself, Mamma, and Sonya- should be as wellressed as possible. Sonya and her mother put themselves entirely iner hands. The countess was to wear a claret-colored velvet dress, andhe two girls white gauze over pink silk slips, with roses on theirodices and their hair dressed a la grecque.
	Everything essential had already been done; feet, hands, necks,nd ears washed, perfumed, and powdered, as befits a ball; thepenwork silk stockings and white satin shoes with ribbons werelready on; the hairdressing was almost done. Sonya was finishingressing and so was the countess, but Natasha, who had bustled aboutelping them all, was behindhand. She was still sitting before aooking-glass with a dressing jacket thrown over her slenderhoulders. Sonya stood ready dressed in the middle of the room and,ressing the head of a pin till it hurt her dainty finger, wasixing on a last ribbon that squeaked as the pin went through it.
	"That's not the way, that's not the way, Sonya!" cried Natashaurning her head and clutching with both hands at her hair which theaid who was dressing it had not time to release. "That bow is notight. Come here!"
	Sonya sat down and Natasha pinned the ribbon on differently.
	"Allow me, Miss! I can't do it like that," said the maid who wasolding Natasha's hair.
	"Oh, dear! Well then, wait. That's right, Sonya."
	"Aren't you ready? It is nearly ten," came the countess' voice.
	"Directly! Directly! And you, Mamma?"
	"I have only my cap to pin on."
	"Don't do it without me!" called Natasha. "You won't do it right."
	"But it's already ten."
	They had decided to be at the ball by half past ten, and Natasha hadtill to get dressed and they had to call at the Taurida Gardens.
	When her hair was done, Natasha, in her short petticoat from underhich her dancing shoes showed, and in her mother's dressing jacket,an up to Sonya, scrutinized her, and then ran to her mother.urning her mother's head this way and that, she fastened on the capnd, hurriedly kissing her gray hair, ran back to the maids who wereurning up the hem of her skirt.
	The cause of the delay was Natasha's skirt, which was too long.wo maids were turning up the hem and hurriedly biting off the ends ofhread. A third with pins in her mouth was running about between theountess and Sonya, and a fourth held the whole of the gossamerarment up high on one uplifted hand.
	"Mavra, quicker, darling!"
	"Give me my thimble, Miss, from there..."
	"Whenever will you be ready?" asked the count coming to the door.Here is here is some scent. Peronskaya must be tired of waiting."
	"It's ready, Miss," said the maid, holding up the shortened gauzeress with two fingers, and blowing and shaking something off it, asf by this to express a consciousness of the airiness and purity ofhat she held.
	Natasha began putting on the dress.
	"In a minute! In a minute! Don't come in, Papa!" she cried to herather as he opened the door- speaking from under the filmy skirthich still covered her whole face.
	Sonya slammed the door to. A minute later they let the count in.e was wearing a blue swallow-tail coat, shoes and stockings, andas perfumed and his hair pomaded.
	"Oh, Papa! how nice you look! Charming!" cried Natasha, as she stoodn the middle of the room smoothing out the folds of the gauze.
	"If you please, Miss! allow me," said the maid, who on her knees wasulling the skirt straight and shifting the pins from one side ofer mouth to the other with her tongue.
	"Say what you like," exclaimed Sonya, in a despairing voice as sheooked at Natasha, "say what you like, it's still too long."
	Natasha stepped back to look at herself in the pier glass. The dressas too long.
	"Really, madam, it is not at all too long," said Mavra, crawlingn her knees after her young lady.
	"Well, if it's too long we'll take it up... we'll tack it up inne minute," said the resolute Dunyasha taking a needle that was stuckn the front of her little shawl and, still kneeling on the floor, seto work once more.
	At that moment, with soft steps, the countess came in shyly, iner cap and velvet gown.
	"Oo-oo, my beauty!" exclaimed the count, "she looks better thanny of you!"
	He would have embraced her but, blushing, she stepped asideearing to be rumpled.
	"Mamma, your cap, more to this side," said Natasha. "I'll arranget," and she rushed forward so that the maids who were tacking uper skirt could not move fast enough and a piece of gauze was tornff.
	"Oh goodness! What has happened? Really it was not my fault!"
	"Never mind, I'll run it up, it won't show," said Dunyasha.
	"What a beauty- a very queen!" said the nurse as she came to theoor. "And Sonya! They are lovely!"
	At a quarter past ten they at last got into their carriages andtarted. But they had still to call at the Taurida Gardens.
	Peronskaya was quite ready. In spite of her age and plainness shead gone through the same process as the Rostovs, but with lesslurry- for to her it was a matter of routine. Her ugly old body wasashed, perfumed, and powdered in just the same way. She had washedehind her ears just as carefully, and when she entered her drawingoom in her yellow dress, wearing her badge as maid of honor, herld lady's maid was as full of rapturous admiration as the Rostovs'ervants had been.
	She praised the Rostovs' toilets. They praised her taste and toilet,nd at eleven o'clock, careful of their coiffures and dresses, theyettled themselves in their carriages and drove off.BK6|CH15
	CHAPTER XV
	Natasha had not had a moment free since early morning and had notnce had time to think of what lay before her.
	In the damp chill air and crowded closeness of the swaying carriage,he for the first time vividly imagined what was in store for herhere at the ball, in those brightly lighted rooms- with music,lowers, dances, the Emperor, and all the brilliant young people ofetersburg. The prospect was so splendid that she hardly believed itould come true, so out of keeping was it with the chill darknessnd closeness of the carriage. She understood all that awaited hernly when, after stepping over the red baize at the entrance, shentered the hall, took off her fur cloak, and, beside Sonya and inront of her mother, mounted the brightly illuminated stairs betweenhe flowers. Only then did she remember how she must behave at a ball,nd tried to assume the majestic air she considered indispensableor a girl on such an occasion. But, fortunately for her, she felt heryes growing misty, she saw nothing clearly, her pulse beat aundred to the minute, and the blood throbbed at her heart. Sheould not assume that pose, which would have made her ridiculous,nd she moved on almost fainting from excitement and trying with aller might to conceal it. And this was the very attitude that becameer best. Before and behind them other visitors were entering, alsoalking in low tones and wearing ball dresses. The mirrors on theanding reflected ladies in white, pale-blue, and pink dresses, withiamonds and pearls on their bare necks and arms.
	Natasha looked in the mirrors and could not distinguish hereflection from the others. All was blended into one brilliantrocession. On entering the ballroom the regular hum of voices,ootsteps, and greetings deafened Natasha, and the light and glitterazzled her still more. The host and hostess, who had already beentanding at the door for half an hour repeating the same words tohe various arrivals, "Charme de vous voir,"* greeted the Rostovsnd Peronskaya in the same manner.
	*"Delighted to see you."
	The two girls in their white dresses, each with a rose in herlack hair, both curtsied in the same way, but the hostess' eyenvoluntarily rested longer on the slim Natasha. She looked at her andave her alone a special smile in addition to her usual smile asostess. Looking at her she may have recalled the golden,rrecoverable days of her own girlhood and her own first ball. Theost also followed Natasha with his eyes and asked the count which wasis daughter.
	"Charming!" said he, kissing the tips of his fingers.
	In the ballroom guests stood crowding at the entrance doors awaitinghe Emperor. The countess took up a position in one of the frontows of that crowd. Natasha heard and felt that several people weresking about her and looking at her. She realized that thoseoticing her liked her, and this observation helped to calm her.
	"There are some like ourselves and some worse," she thought.
	Peronskaya was pointing out to the countess the most importanteople at the ball.
	"That is the Dutch ambassador, do you see? That gray-haired man,"he said, indicating an old man with a profusion of silver-grayurly hair, who was surrounded by ladies laughing at something heaid.
	"Ah, here she is, the Queen of Petersburg, Countess Bezukhova," saideronskaya, indicating Helene who had just entered. "How lovely! Shes quite equal to Marya Antonovna. See how the men, young and old, payourt to her. Beautiful and clever... they say Prince- is quite madbout her. But see, those two, though not good-looking, are evenore run after."
	She pointed to a lady who was crossing the room followed by a verylain daughter.
	"She is a splendid match, a millionairess," said Peronskaya. "Andook, here come her suitors."
	"That is Bezukhova's brother, Anatole Kuragin," she said, indicating handsome officer of the Horse Guards who passed by them with headrect, looking at something over the heads of the ladies. "He'sandsome, isn't he? I hear they will marry him to that rich girl.ut your cousin, Drubetskoy, is also very attentive to her. They sayhe has millions. Oh yes, that's the French ambassador himself!" sheeplied to the countess' inquiry about Caulaincourt. "Looks as if heere a king! All the same, the French are charming, very charming.o one more charming in society. Ah, here she is! Yes, she is stillhe most beautiful of them all, our Marya Antonovna! And how simplyhe is dressed! Lovely! And that stout one in spectacles is theniversal Freemason," she went on, indicating Pierre. "Put himeside his wife and he looks a regular buffoon!"
	Pierre, swaying his stout body, advanced, making way through therowd and nodding to right and left as casually and good-naturedlys if he were passing through a crowd at a fair. He pushed through,vidently looking for someone.
	Natasha looked joyfully at the familiar face of Pierre, "theuffoon," as Peronskaya had called him, and knew he was looking forhem, and for her in particular. He had promised to be at the ball andntroduce partners to her.
	But before he reached them Pierre stopped beside a very handsome,ark man of middle height, and in a white uniform, who stood by aindow talking to a tall man wearing stars and a ribbon. Natasha atnce recognized the shorter and younger man in the white uniform: itas Bolkonski, who seemed to her to have grown much younger,appier, and better-looking.
	"There's someone else we know- Bolkonski, do you see, Mamma?" saidatasha, pointing out Prince Andrew. "You remember, he stayed aight with us at Otradnoe."
	"Oh, you know him?" said Peronskaya. "I can't bear him. Il fait aresent la pluie et le beau temps."* He's too proud for anything.akes after his father. And he's hand in glove with Speranski, writingome project or other. Just look how he treats the ladies! There's onealking to him and he has turned away," she said, pointing at him.I'd give it to him if he treated me as he does those ladies."
	*"He is all the rage just now.BK6|CH16
	CHAPTER XVI
	Suddenly everybody stirred, began talking, and pressed forward andhen back, and between the two rows, which separated, the Emperorntered to the sounds of music that had immediately struck up.ehind him walked his host and hostess. He walked in rapidly, bowingo right and left as if anxious to get the first moments of theeception over. The band played the polonaise in vogue at that time onccount of the words that had been set to it, beginning: "Alexander,lisaveta, all our hearts you ravish quite..." The Emperor passed ono the drawing room, the crowd made a rush for the doors, andeveral persons with excited faces hurried there and back again.hen the crowd hastily retired from the drawing-room door, at whichhe Emperor reappeared talking to the hostess. A young man, lookingistraught, pounced down on the ladies, asking them to move aside.ome ladies, with faces betraying complete forgetfulness of all theules of decorum, pushed forward to the detriment of their toilets.he men began to choose partners and take their places for theolonaise.
	Everyone moved back, and the Emperor came smiling out of the drawingoom leading his hostess by the hand but not keeping time to theusic. The host followed with Marya Antonovna Naryshkina; then camembassadors, ministers, and various generals, whom Peronskayailigently named. More than half the ladies already had partners andere taking up, or preparing to take up, their positions for theolonaise. Natasha felt that she would be left with her mother andonya among a minority of women who crowded near the wall, notaving been invited to dance. She stood with her slender armsanging down, her scarcely defined bosom rising and falling regularly,nd with bated breath and glittering, frightened eyes gazed straightefore her, evidently prepared for the height of joy or misery. Sheas not concerned about the Emperor or any of those great peoplehom Peronskaya was pointing out- she had but one thought: "Is itossible no one will ask me, that I shall not be among the first toance? Is it possible that not one of all these men will notice me?hey do not even seem to see me, or if they do they look as if theyere saying, 'Ah, she's not the one I'm after, so it's not worthooking at her!' No, it's impossible," she thought. "They must knowow I long to dance, how splendidly I dance, and how they wouldnjoy dancing with me."
	The strains of the polonaise, which had continued for a considerableime, had begun to sound like a sad reminiscence to Natasha's ears.he wanted to cry. Peronskaya had left them. The count was at thether end of the room. She and the countess and Sonya were standing byhemselves as in the depths of a forest amid that crowd oftrangers, with no one interested in them and not wanted by anyone.rince Andrew with a lady passed by, evidently not recognizing them.he handsome Anatole was smilingly talking to a partner on his arm andooked at Natasha as one looks at a wall. Boris passed them twicend each time turned away. Berg and his wife, who were not dancing,ame up to them.
	This family gathering seemed humiliating to Natasha- as if thereere nowhere else for the family to talk but here at the ball. She didot listen to or look at Vera, who was telling her something about herwn green dress.
	At last the Emperor stopped beside his last partner (he had dancedith three) and the music ceased. A worried aide-de-camp ran up to theostovs requesting them to stand farther back, though as it was theyere already close to the wall, and from the gallery resounded theistinct, precise, enticingly rhythmical strains of a waltz. Themperor looked smilingly down the room. A minute passed but no one hadet begun dancing. An aide-de-camp, the Master of Ceremonies, wentp to Countess Bezukhova and asked her to dance. She smilinglyaised her hand and laid it on his shoulder without looking at him.he aide-de-camp, an adept in his art, grasping his partner firmlyound her waist, with confident deliberation started smoothly, glidingirst round the edge of the circle, then at the corner of the roome caught Helene's left hand and turned her, the only sound audible,part from the ever-quickening music, being the rhythmic click ofhe spurs on his rapid, agile feet, while at every third beat hisartner's velvet dress spread out and seemed to flash as she whirledound. Natasha gazed at them and was ready to cry because it was nothe who was dancing that first turn of the waltz.
	Prince Andrew, in the white uniform of a cavalry colonel, wearingtockings and dancing shoes, stood looking animated and bright inhe front row of the circle not far from the Rostovs. Baron Firhoffas talking to him about the first sitting of the Council of Stateo be held next day. Prince Andrew, as one closely connected withperanski and participating in the work of the legislative commission,ould give reliable information about that sitting, concerning whicharious rumors were current. But not listening to what Firhoff wasaying, he was gazing now at the sovereign and now at the menntending to dance who had not yet gathered courage to enter theircle.
	Prince Andrew was watching these men abashed by the Emperor'sresence, and the women who were breathlessly longing to be asked toance.
	Pierre came up to him and caught him by the arm.
	"You always dance. I have a protegee, the young Rostova, here. Asker," he said.
	"Where is she?" asked Bolkonski. "Excuse me!" he added, turning tohe baron, "we will finish this conversation elsewhere- at a ballne must dance." He stepped forward in the direction Pierre indicated.he despairing, dejected expression of Natasha's face caught hisye. He recognized her, guessed her feelings, saw that it was herebut, remembered her conversation at the window, and with anxpression of pleasure on his face approached Countess Rostova.
	"Allow me to introduce you to my daughter," said the countess,ith heightened color.
	"I have the pleasure of being already acquainted, if the countessemembers me," said Prince Andrew with a low and courteous bow quiteelying Peronskaya's remarks about his rudeness, and approachingatasha he held out his arm to grasp her waist before he had completedis invitation. He asked her to waltz. That tremulous expression onatasha's face, prepared either for despair or rapture, suddenlyrightened into a happy, grateful, childlike smile.
	"I have long been waiting for you," that frightened happy littleirl seemed to say by the smile that replaced the threatened tears, ashe raised her hand to Prince Andrew's shoulder. They were theecond couple to enter the circle. Prince Andrew was one of the bestancers of his day and Natasha danced exquisitely. Her little feetn their white satin dancing shoes did their work swiftly, lightly,nd independently of herself, while her face beamed with ecstaticappiness. Her slender bare arms and neck were not beautiful- comparedo Helene's her shoulders looked thin and her bosom undeveloped. Butelene seemed, as it were, hardened by a varnish left by the thousandsf looks that had scanned her person, while Natasha was like a girlxposed for the first time, who would have felt very much ashamedad she not been assured that this was absolutely necessary.
	Prince Andrew liked dancing, and wishing to escape as quickly asossible from the political and clever talk which everyone addressedo him, wishing also to break up the circle of restraint heisliked, caused by the Emperor's presence, he danced, and hadhosen Natasha because Pierre pointed her out to him and because sheas the first pretty girl who caught his eye; but scarcely had hembraced that slender supple figure and felt her stirring so closeo him and smiling so near him than the wine of her charm rose tois head, and he felt himself revived and rejuvenated when aftereaving her he stood breathing deeply and watching the other dancers.BK6|CH17
	CHAPTER XVII
	After Prince Andrew, Boris came up to ask Natasha for dance, andhen the aide-de-camp who had opened the ball, and several other youngen, so that, flushed and happy, and passing on her superfluousartners to Sonya, she did not cease dancing all the evening. Sheoticed and saw nothing of what occupied everyone else. Not only didhe fail to notice that the Emperor talked a long time with the Frenchmbassador, and how particularly gracious he was to a certain lady, orhat Prince So-and-so and So-and-so did and said this and that, andhat Helene had great success and was honored was by the specialttention of So-and-so, but she did not even see the Emperor, and onlyoticed that he had gone because the ball became livelier after hiseparture. For one of the merry cotillions before supper Prince Andrewas again her partner. He reminded her of their first encounter in thetradnoe avenue, and how she had been unable to sleep that moonlightight, and told her how he had involuntarily overheard her. Natashalushed at that recollection and tried to excuse herself, as ifhere had been something to be ashamed of in what Prince Andrew hadverheard.
	Like all men who have grown up in society, Prince Andrew likedeeting someone there not of the conventional society stamp. Anduch was Natasha, with her surprise, her delight, her shyness, andven her mistakes in speaking French. With her he behaved with specialare and tenderness, sitting beside her and talking of the simplestnd most unimportant matters; he admired her shy grace. In theiddle of the cotillion, having completed one of the figures, Natasha,till out of breath, was returning to her seat when another dancerhose her. She was tired and panting and evidently thought ofeclining, but immediately put her hand gaily on the man's shoulder,miling at Prince Andrew.
	"I'd be glad to sit beside you and rest: I'm tired; but you seeow they keep asking me, and I'm glad of it, I'm happy and I loveverybody, and you and I understand it all," and much, much more wasaid in her smile. When her partner left her Natasha ran across theoom to choose two ladies for the figure.
	"If she goes to her cousin first and then to another lady, sheill be my wife," said Prince Andrew to himself quite to his ownurprise, as he watched her. She did go first to her cousin.
	"What rubbish sometimes enters one's head!" thought Prince Andrew,but what is certain is that that girl is so charming, so original,hat she won't be dancing here a month before she will bearried.... Such as she are rare here," he thought, as Natasha,eadjusting a rose that was slipping on her bodice, settled herselfeside him.
	When the cotillion was over the old count in his blue coat came upo the dancers. He invited Prince Andrew to come and see them, andsked his daughter whether she was enjoying herself. Natasha did notnswer at once but only looked up with a smile that saideproachfully: "How can you ask such a question?"
	"I have never enjoyed myself so much before!" she said, and Princendrew noticed how her thin arms rose quickly as if to embrace herather and instantly dropped again. Natasha was happier than she hadver been in her life. She was at that height of bliss when oneecomes completely kind and good and does not believe in theossibility of evil, unhappiness, or sorrow.
	At that ball Pierre for the first time felt humiliated by theosition his wife occupied in court circles. He was gloomy andbsent-minded. A deep furrow ran across his forehead, and standingy a window he stared over his spectacles seeing no one.
	On her way to supper Natasha passed him.
	Pierre's gloomy, unhappy look struck her. She stopped in front ofim. She wished to help him, to bestow on him the superabundance ofer own happiness.
	"How delightful it is, Count!" said she. "Isn't it?"
	Pierre smiled absent-mindedly, evidently not grasping what she said.
	"Yes, I am very glad," he said.
	"How can people be dissatisfied with anything?" thought Natasha.Especially such a capital fellow as Bezukhov!" In Natasha's eyesll the people at the ball alike were good, kind, and splendid people,oving one another; none of them capable of injuring another- and sohey ought all to be happy.BK6|CH18
	CHAPTER XVIII
	Next day Prince Andrew thought of the ball, but his mind did notwell on it long. "Yes, it was a very brilliant ball," and then...Yes, that little Rostova is very charming. There's something fresh,riginal, un-Petersburg-like about her that distinguishes her." Thatas all he thought about yesterday's ball, and after his morning teae set to work.
	But either from fatigue or want of sleep he was ill-disposed forork and could get nothing done. He kept criticizing his own work,s he often did, and was glad when he heard someone coming.
	The visitor was Bitski, who served on various committees, frequentedll the societies in Petersburg, and a passionate devotee of the newdeas and of Speranski, and a diligent Petersburg newsmonger- one ofhose men who choose their opinions like their clothes according tohe fashion, but who for that very reason appear to be the warmestartisans. Hardly had he got rid of his hat before he ran intorince Andrew's room with a preoccupied air and at once began talking.e had just heard particulars of that morning's sitting of the Councilf State opened by the Emperor, and he spoke of it enthusiastically.he Emperor's speech had been extraordinary. It had been a speech suchs only constitutional monarchs deliver. "The Sovereign plainly saidhat the Council and Senate are estates of the realm, he said that theovernment must rest not on authority but on secure bases. The Emperoraid that the fiscal system must be reorganized and the accountsublished," recounted Bitski, emphasizing certain words and openingis eyes significantly.
	"Ah, yes! Today's events mark an epoch, the greatest epoch in ouristory," he concluded.
	Prince Andrew listened to the account of the opening of theouncil of State, which he had so impatiently awaited and to whiche had attached such importance, and was surprised that this event,ow that it had taken place, did not affect him, and even seemed quitensignificant. He listened with quiet irony to Bitski's enthusiasticccount of it. A very simple thought occurred to him: "What does itatter to me or to Bitski what the Emperor was pleased to say at theouncil? Can all that make me any happier or better?"
	And this simple reflection suddenly destroyed all the interestrince Andrew had felt in the impending reforms. He was going toine that evening at Speranski's, "with only a few friends," as theost had said when inviting him. The prospect of that dinner in thentimate home circle of the man he so admired had greatly interestedrince Andrew, especially as he had not yet seen Speranski in hisomestic surroundings, but now he felt disinclined to go to it.
	At the appointed hour, however, he entered the modest houseperanski owned in the Taurida Gardens. In the parqueted dining roomhis small house, remarkable for its extreme cleanliness (suggestinghat of a monastery), Prince Andrew, who was rather late, found theriendly gathering of Speranski's intimate acquaintances alreadyssembled at five o'clock. There were no ladies present exceptperanski's little daughter (long-faced like her father) and heroverness. The other guests were Gervais, Magnitski, and Stolypin.hile still in the anteroom Prince Andrew heard loud voices and ainging staccato laugh- a laugh such as one hears on the stage.omeone- it sounded like Speranski- was distinctly ejaculatinga-ha-ha. Prince Andrew had never before heard Speranski's famousaugh, and this ringing, high pitched laughter from a statesman made atrange impression on him.
	He entered the dining room. The whole company were standingetween two windows at a small table laid with hors-d'oeuvres.peranski, wearing a gray swallow-tail coat with a star on the breast,nd evidently still the same waistcoat and high white stock he hadorn at the meeting of the Council of State, stood at the table with aeaming countenance. His guests surrounded him. Magnitski,ddressing himself to Speranski, was relating an anecdote, andperanski was laughing in advance at what Magnitski was going toay. When Prince Andrew entered the room Magnitski's words weregain crowned by laughter. Stolypin gave a deep bass guffaw as heunched a piece of bread and cheese. Gervais laughed softly with aissing chuckle, and Speranski in a high-pitched staccato manner.
	Still laughing, Speranski held out his soft white hand to Princendrew.
	"Very pleased to see you, Prince," he said. "One moment..." heent on, turning to Magnitski and interrupting his story. "We havegreed that this is a dinner for recreation, with not a word aboutusiness!" and turning again to the narrator he began to laugh afresh.
	Prince Andrew looked at the laughing Speranski with astonishment,egret, and disillusionment. It seemed to him that this was notperanski but someone else. Everything that had formerly appearedysterious and fascinating in Speranski suddenly became plain andnattractive.
	At dinner the conversation did not cease for a moment and seemedo consist of the contents of a book of funny anecdotes. Beforeagnitski had finished his story someone else was anxious to relateomething still funnier. Most of the anecdotes, if not relating to thetate service, related to people in the service. It seemed that inhis company the insignificance of those people was so definitelyccepted that the only possible attitude toward them was one of goodumored ridicule. Speranski related how at the Council that morning deaf dignitary, when asked his opinion, replied that he thought sooo. Gervais gave a long account of an official revision, remarkableor the stupidity of everybody concerned. Stolypin, stuttering,roke into the conversation and began excitedly talking of thebuses that existed under the former order of things- threatening toive a serious turn to the conversation. Magnitski starting quizzingtolypin about his vehemence. Gervais intervened with a joke, andhe talk reverted to its former lively tone.
	Evidently Speranski liked to rest after his labors and findmusement in a circle of friends, and his guests, understanding hisish, tried to enliven him and amuse themselves. But their gaietyeemed to Prince Andrew mirthless and tiresome. Speranski'sigh-pitched voice struck him unpleasantly, and the incessant laughterrated on him like a false note. Prince Andrew did not laugh andeared that he would be a damper on the spirits of the company, but none took any notice of his being out of harmony with the general mood.hey all seemed very gay.
	He tried several times to join in the conversation, but hisemarks were tossed aside each time like a cork thrown out of theater, and he could not jest with them.
	There was nothing wrong or unseemly in what they said, it wasitty and might have been funny, but it lacked just that somethinghich is the salt of mirth, and they were not even aware that such ahing existed.
	After dinner Speranski's daughter and her governess rose. Heatted the little girl with his white hand and kissed her. And thatesture, too, seemed unnatural to Prince Andrew.
	The men remained at table over their port- English fashion. In theidst of a conversation that was started about Napoleon's Spanishffairs, which they all agreed in approving, Prince Andrew began toxpress a contrary opinion. Speranski smiled and, with an evident wisho prevent the conversation from taking an unpleasant course, told atory that had no connection with the previous conversation. For a fewoments all were silent.
	Having sat some time at table, Speranski corked a bottle of winend, remarking, "Nowadays good wine rides in a carriage and pair,"assed it to the servant and got up. All rose and continuing to talkoudly went into the drawing room. Two letters brought by a courierere handed to Speranski and he took them to his study. As soon ase had left the room the general merriment stopped and the guestsegan to converse sensibly and quietly with one another.
	"Now for the recitation!" said Speranski on returning from histudy. "A wonderful talent!" he said to Prince Andrew, and Magnitskimmediately assumed a pose and began reciting some humorous versesn French which he had composed about various well-known Petersburgeople. He was interrupted several times by applause. When theerses were finished Prince Andrew went up to Speranski and took hiseave.
	"Where are you off to so early?" asked Speranski.
	"I promised to go to a reception."
	They said no more. Prince Andrew looked closely into thoseirrorlike, impenetrable eyes, and felt that it had been ridiculous ofim to have expected anything from Speranski and from any of his ownctivities connected with him, or ever to have attributed importanceo what Speranski was doing. That precise, mirthless laughter rangn Prince Andrew's ears long after he had left the house.
	When he reached home Prince Andrew began thinking of his life inetersburg during those last four months as if it were somethingew. He recalled his exertions and solicitations, and the history ofis project of army reform, which had been accepted foronsideration and which they were trying to pass over in silenceimply because another, a very poor one, had already been prepared andubmitted to the Emperor. He thought of the meetings of a committee ofhich Berg was a member. He remembered how carefully and at whatength everything relating to form and procedure was discussed athose meetings, and how sedulously and promptly all that related tohe gist of the business was evaded. He recalled his labors on theegal Code, and how painstakingly he had translated the articles ofhe Roman and French codes into Russian, and he felt ashamed ofimself. Then he vividly pictured to himself Bogucharovo, hisccupations in the country, his journey to Ryazan; he remembered theeasants and Dron the village elder, and mentally applying to them theersonal Rights he had divided into paragraphs, he felt astonishedhat he could have spent so much time on such useless work.BK6|CH19
	CHAPTER XIX
	Next day Prince Andrew called at a few houses he had not visitedefore, and among them at the Rostovs' with whom he had renewedcquaintance at the ball. Apart from considerations of politenesshich demanded the call, he wanted to see that original, eager girlho had left such a pleasant impression on his mind, in her own home.
	Natasha was one of the first to meet him. She was wearing aark-blue house dress in which Prince Andrew thought her even prettierhan in her ball dress. She and all the Rostov family welcomed hims an old friend, simply and cordially. The whole family, whom head formerly judged severely, now seemed to him to consist ofxcellent, simple, and kindly people. The old count's hospitalitynd good nature, which struck one especially in Petersburg as aleasant surprise, were such that Prince Andrew could not refuse totay to dinner. "Yes," he thought, "they are capital people, who ofourse have not the slightest idea what a treasure they possess inatasha; but they are kindly folk and form the best possible settingor this strikingly poetic, charming girl, overflowing with life!"
	In Natasha Prince Andrew was conscious of a strange world completelylien to him and brimful of joys unknown to him, a different world,hat in the Otradnoe avenue and at the window that moonlight night hadlready begun to disconcert him. Now this world disconcerted him noonger and was no longer alien to him, but he himself having enteredt found in it a new enjoyment.
	After dinner Natasha, at Prince Andrew's request, went to thelavichord and began singing. Prince Andrew stood by a windowalking to the ladies and listened to her. In the midst of a phrase heeased speaking and suddenly felt tears choking him, a thing he hadhought impossible for him. He looked at Natasha as she sang, andomething new and joyful stirred in his soul. He felt happy and at theame time sad. He had absolutely nothing to weep about yet he waseady to weep. What about? His former love? The little princess? Hisisillusionments?... His hopes for the future?... Yes and no. Thehief reason was a sudden, vivid sense of the terrible contrastetween something infinitely great and illimitable within him and thatimited and material something that he, and even she, was. Thisontrast weighed on and yet cheered him while she sang.
	As soon as Natasha had finished she went up to him and asked howe liked her voice. She asked this and then became confused, feelinghat she ought not to have asked it. He smiled, looking at her, andaid he liked her singing as he liked everything she did.
	Prince Andrew left the Rostovs' late in the evening. He went toed from habit, but soon realized that he could not sleep. Havingit his candle he sat up in bed, then got up, then lay down againot at all troubled by his sleeplessness: his soul was as fresh andoyful as if he had stepped out of a stuffy room into God's ownresh air. It did not enter his head that he was in love with Natasha;e was not thinking about her, but only picturing her to himself,nd in consequence all life appeared in a new light. "Why do I strive,hy do I toil in this narrow, confined frame, when life, all life withll its joys, is open to me?" said he to himself. And for the firstime for a very long while he began making happy plans for the future.e decided that he must attend to his son's education by finding autor and putting the boy in his charge, then he ought to retirerom the service and go abroad, and see England, Switzerland andtaly. "I must use my freedom while I feel so much strength andouth in me," he said to himself. "Pierre was right when he said oneust believe in the possibility of happiness in order to be happy, andow I do believe in it. Let the dead bury their dead, but while oneas life one must live and be happy!" thought he.BK6|CH20
	CHAPTER XX
	One morning Colonel Berg, whom Pierre knew as he knew everybody inoscow and Petersburg, came to see him. Berg arrived in anmmaculate brand-new uniform, with his hair pomaded and brushedorward over his temples as the Emperor Alexander wore his hair.
	"I have just been to see the countess, your wife. Unfortunatelyhe could not grant my request, but I hope, Count, I shall be moreortunate with you," he said with a smile.
	"What is it you wish, Colonel? I am at your service."
	"I have now quite settled in my new rooms, Count" (Berg said thisith perfect conviction that this information could not but begreeable), "and so I wish to arrange just a small party for my ownnd my wife's friends." (He smiled still more pleasantly.) "I wishedo ask the countess and you to do me the honor of coming to tea and toupper."
	Only Countess Helene, considering the society of such people ashe Bergs beneath her, could be cruel enough to refuse such annvitation. Berg explained so clearly why he wanted to collect atis house a small but select company, and why this would give himleasure, and why though he grudged spending money on cards ornything harmful, he was prepared to run into some expense for theake of good society- that Pierre could not refuse, and promised toome.
	"But don't be late, Count, if I may venture to ask; about teninutes to eight, please. We shall make up a rubber. Our general isoming. He is very good to me. We shall have supper, Count. So youill do me the favor."
	Contrary to his habit of being late, Pierre on that day arrived athe Bergs' house, not at ten but at fifteen minutes to eight.
	Having prepared everything necessary for the party, the Bergs wereeally for their guests' arrival.
	In their new, clean, and light study with its small busts andictures and new furniture sat Berg and his wife. Berg, closelyuttoned up in his new uniform, sat beside his wife explaining toer that one always could and should be acquainted with people abovene, because only then does one get satisfaction from acquaintances.
	"You can get to know something, you can ask for something. See how Ianaged from my first promotion." (Berg measured his life not by yearsut by promotions.) "My comrades are still nobodies, while I am onlyaiting for a vacancy to command a regiment, and have the happiness toe your husband." (He rose and kissed Vera's hand, and on the way toer straightened out a turned-up corner of the carpet.) "And howave I obtained all this? Chiefly by knowing how to choose myquaintances. It goes without saying that one must be conscientiousnd methodical."
	Berg smiled with a sense of his superiority over a weak woman, andaused, reflecting that this dear wife of his was after all but a weakoman who could not understand all that constitutes a man's dignity,hat it was ein Mann zu sein.* Vera at the same time smiling with aense of superiority over her good, conscientious husband, who all theame understood life wrongly, as according to Vera all men did.erg, judging by his wife, thought all women weak and foolish. Vera,udging only by her husband and generalizing from that observation,upposed that all men, though they understand nothing and areonceited and selfish, ascribe common sense to themselves alone.
	*To be a man.
	Berg rose and embraced his wife carefully, so as not to crush herace fichu for which he had paid a good price, kissing her straight onhe lips.
	"The only thing is, we mustn't have children too soon," heontinued, following an unconscious sequence of ideas.
	"Yes," answered Vera, "I don't at all want that. We must live forociety."
	"Princess Yusupova wore one exactly like this," said Berg,ointing to the fichu with a happy and kindly smile.
	Just then Count Bezukhov was announced. Husband and wife glancedt one another, both smiling with self-satisfaction, and each mentallylaiming the honor of this visit.
	"This is what what comes of knowing how to make acquaintances,"hought Berg. "This is what comes of knowing how to conduct oneself."
	"But please don't interrupt me when I am entertaining the guests,"aid Vera, "because I know what interests each of them and what to sayo different people."
	Berg smiled again.
	"It can't be helped: men must sometimes have masculineonversation," said he.
	They received Pierre in their small, new drawing-room, where itas impossible to sit down anywhere without disturbing its symmetry,eatness, and order; so it was quite comprehensible and not strangehat Berg, having generously offered to disturb the symmetry of anrmchair or of the sofa for his dear guest, but being apparentlyainfully undecided on the matter himself, eventually left the visitoro settle the question of selection. Pierre disturbed the symmetryy moving a chair for himself, and Berg and Vera immediately beganheir evening party, interrupting each other in their efforts tontertain their guest.
	Vera, having decided in her own mind that Pierre ought to bentertained with conversation about the French embassy, at onceegan accordingly. Berg, having decided that masculine conversationas required, interrupted his wife's remarks and touched on theuestion of the war with Austria, and unconsciously jumped from theeneral subject to personal considerations as to the proposals madeim to take part in the Austrian campaign and the reasons why he hadeclined them. Though the conversation was very incoherent and Veraas angry at the intrusion of the masculine element, both husbandnd wife felt with satisfaction that, even if only one guest wasresent, their evening had begun very well and was as like as two peaso every other evening party with its talk, tea, and lighted candles.
	Before long Boris, Berg's old comrade, arrived. There was a shade ofondescension and patronage in his treatment of Berg and Vera. Afteroris came a lady with the colonel, then the general himself, then theostovs, and the party became unquestionably exactly like all othervening parties. Berg and Vera could not repress their smiles ofatisfaction at the sight of all this movement in their drawingoom, at the sound of the disconnected talk, the rustling ofresses, and the bowing and scraping. Everything was just as everybodylways has it, especially so the general, who admired the apartment,atted Berg on the shoulder, and with parental authority superintendedhe setting out of the table for boston. The general sat down by Countlya Rostov, who was next to himself the most important guest. The oldeople sat with the old, the young with the young, and the hostesst the tea table, on which stood exactly the same kind of cakes in ailver cake basket as the Panins had at their party. Everything wasust as it was everywhere else.BK6|CH21
	CHAPTER XXI
	Pierre, as one of the principal guests, had to sit down to bostonith Count Rostov, the general, and the colonel. At the card tablee happened to be directly facing Natasha, and was struck by a curioushange that had come over her since the ball, She was silent, andot only less pretty than at the ball, but only redeemed fromlainness by her look of gentle indifference to everything around.
	"What's the matter with her?" thought Pierre, glancing at her. Sheas sitting by her sister at the tea table, and reluctantly, withoutooking at him, made some reply to Boris who sat down beside her.fter playing out a whole suit and to his partner's delight takingive tricks, Pierre, hearing greetings and the steps of someone whoad entered the room while he was picking up his tricks, glanced againt Natasha.
	"What has happened to her?" he asked himself with still greaterurprise.
	Prince Andrew was standing before her, saying something to herith a look of tender solicitude. She, having raised her head, wasooking up at him, flushed and evidently trying to master her rapidreathing. And the bright glow of some inner fire that had beenuppressed was again alight in her. She was completely transformed androm a plain girl had again become what she had been at the ball.
	Prince Andrew went up to Pierre, and the latter noticed a new andouthful expression in his friend's face.
	Pierre changed places several times during the game, sitting nowith his back to Natasha and now facing her, but during the whole ofhe six rubbers he watched her and his friend.
	"Something very important is happening between them," thoughtierre, and a feeling that was both joyful and painful agitated himnd made him neglect the game.
	After six rubbers the general got up, saying that it was no uselaying like that, and Pierre was released. Natasha on one side wasalking with Sonya and Boris, and Vera with a subtle smile wasaying something to Prince Andrew. Pierre went up to his friend and,sking whether they were talking secrets, sat down beside them.era, having noticed Prince Andrew's attentions to Natasha, decidedhat at a party, a real evening party, subtle allusions to theender passion were absolutely necessary and, seizing a moment whenrince Andrew was alone, began a conversation with him abouteelings in general and about her sister. With so intellectual a guests she considered Prince Andrew to be, she felt that she had to employer diplomatic tact.
	When Pierre went up to them he noticed that Vera was being carriedway by her self-satisfied talk, but that Prince Andrew seemedmbarrassed, a thing that rarely happened with him.
	"What do you think?" Vera was saying with an arch smile. "You are soiscerning, Prince, and understand people's characters so well at alance. What do you think of Natalie? Could she be constant in herttachments? Could she, like other women" (Vera meant herself),love a man once for all and remain true to him forever? That ishat I consider true love. What do you think, Prince?"
	"I know your sister too little," replied Prince Andrew, with aarcastic smile under which he wished to hide his embarrassment, "toe able to solve so delicate a question, and then I have noticedhat the less attractive a woman is the more constant she is likely toe," he added, and looked up Pierre who was just approaching them.
	"Yes, that is true, Prince. In our days," continued Vera- mentioningour days" as people of limited intelligence are fond of doing,magining that they have discovered and appraised the peculiarities ofour days" and that human characteristics change with the times- "inur days a girl has so much freedom that the pleasure of being courtedften stifles real feeling in her. And it must be confessed thatatalie is very susceptible." This return to the subject of Natalieaused Prince Andrew to knit his brows with discomfort: he was abouto rise, but Vera continued with a still more subtle smile:
	"I think no one has been more courted than she," she went on, "butill quite lately she never cared seriously for anyone. Now younow, Count," she said to Pierre, "even our dear cousin Boris, who,etween ourselves, was very far gone in the land of tenderness..."alluding to a map of love much in vogue at that time).
	Prince Andrew frowned and remained silent.
	"You are friendly with Boris, aren't you?" asked Vera.
	"Yes, I know him..."
	"I expect he has told you of his childish love for Natasha?"
	"Oh, there was childish love?" suddenly asked Prince Andrew,lushing unexpectedly.
	"Yes, you know between cousins intimacy often leads to love. Leousinage est un dangereux voisinage.* Don't you think so?"
	*"Cousinhood is a dangerous neighborhood."
	"Oh, undoubtedly!" said Prince Andrew, and with sudden and unnaturaliveliness he began chaffing Pierre about the need to be veryareful with his fifty-year-old Moscow cousins, and in the midst ofhese jesting remarks he rose, taking Pierre by the arm, and drewim aside.
	"Well?" asked Pierre, seeing his friend's strange animation withurprise, and noticing the glance he turned on Natasha as he rose.
	"I must... I must have a talk with you," said Prince Andrew. "Younow that pair of women's gloves?" (He referred to the Masonicloves given to a newly initiated Brother to present to the woman heoved.) "I... but no, I will talk to you later on," and with a strangeight in his eyes and restlessness in his movements, Prince Andrewpproached Natasha and sat down beside her. Pierre saw how Princendrew asked her something and how she flushed as she replied.
	But at that moment Berg came to Pierre and began insisting that hehould take part in an argument between the general and the colonel onhe affairs in Spain.
	Berg was satisfied and happy. The smile of pleasure never left hisace. The party was very successful and quite like other parties head seen. Everything was similar: the ladies' subtle talk, theards, the general raising his voice at the card table, and theamovar and the tea cakes; only one thing was lacking that he hadlways seen at the evening parties he wished to imitate. They hadot yet had a loud conversation among the men and a dispute aboutomething important and clever. Now the general had begun such aiscussion and so Berg drew Pierre to it.BK6|CH22
	CHAPTER XXII
	Next day, having been invited by the count, Prince Andrew dined withhe Rostovs and spent the rest of the day there.
	Everyone in the house realized for whose sake Prince Andrew came,nd without concealing it he tried to be with Natasha all day. Notnly in the soul of the frightened yet happy and enraptured Natasha,ut in the whole house, there was a feeling of awe at somethingmportant that was bound to happen. The countess looked with sad andternly serious eyes at Prince Andrew when he talked to Natasha andimidly started some artificial conversation about trifles as soons he looked her way. Sonya was afraid to leave Natasha and afraidf being in the way when she was with them. Natasha grew pale, in aanic of expectation, when she remained alone with him for a moment.rince Andrew surprised her by his timidity. She felt that he wantedo say something to her but could not bring himself to do so.
	In the evening, when Prince Andrew had left, the countess went up toatasha and whispered: "Well, what?"
	"Mamma! For heaven's sake don't ask me anything now! One can'talk about that," said Natasha.
	But all the same that night Natasha, now agitated and nowrightened, lay long time in her mother's bed gazing straight beforeer. She told her how he had complimented her, how he told her heas going abroad, asked her where they were going to spend the summer,nd then how he had asked her about Boris.
	"But such a... such a... never happened to me before!" she said.Only I feel afraid in his presence. I am always afraid when I'mith him. What does that mean? Does it mean that it's the realhing? Yes? Mamma, are you asleep?"
	"No, my love; I am frightened myself," answered her mother. "Nowo!"
	"All the same I shan't sleep. What silliness, to sleep! Mummy!ummy! such a thing never happened to me before," she said,urprised and alarmed at the feeling she was aware of in herself. "Andould we ever have thought!..."
	It seemed to Natasha that even at the time she first saw Princendrew at Otradnoe she had fallen in love with him. It was as if sheeared this strange, unexpected happiness of meeting again the veryan she had then chosen (she was firmly convinced she had done so) andf finding him, as it seemed, not indifferent to her.
	"And it had to happen that he should come specially to Petersburghile we are here. And it had to happen that we should meet at thatall. It is fate. Clearly it is fate that everything led up to this!lready then, directly I saw him I felt something peculiar."
	"What else did he say to you? What are those verses? Read them..."aid her mother, thoughtfully, referring to some verses Princendrew had written in Natasha's album.
	"Mamma, one need not be ashamed of his being a widower?"
	"Don't, Natasha! Pray to God. 'Marriages are made in heaven,'"aid her mother.
	"Darling Mummy, how I love you! How happy I am!" cried Natasha,hedding tears of joy and excitement and embracing her mother.
	At that very time Prince Andrew was sitting with Pierre andelling him of his love for Natasha and his firm resolve to make heris wife.
	That day Countess Helene had a reception at her house. The Frenchmbassador was there, and a foreign prince of the blood who had ofate become a frequent visitor of hers, and many brilliant ladiesnd gentlemen. Pierre, who had come downstairs, walked through theooms and struck everyone by his preoccupied, absent-minded, andorose air.
	Since the ball he had felt the approach of a fit of nervousepression and had made desperate efforts to combat it. Since thentimacy of his wife with the royal prince, Pierre had unexpectedlyeen made a gentleman of the bedchamber, and from that time he hadegun to feel oppressed and ashamed in court society, and darkhoughts of the vanity of all things human came to him oftener thanefore. At the same time the feeling he had noticed between hisrotegee Natasha and Prince Andrew accentuated his gloom by theontrast between his own position and his friend's. He tried equallyo avoid thinking about his wife, and about Natasha and Prince Andrew;nd again everything seemed to him insignificant in comparison withternity; again the question: for what? presented itself; and heorced himself to work day and night at Masonic labors, hoping torive away the evil spirit that threatened him. Toward midnight, aftere had left the countess' apartments, he was sitting upstairs in ahabby dressing gown, copying out the original transaction of thecottish lodge of Freemasons at a table in his low room cloudy withobacco smoke, when someone came in. It was Prince Andrew.
	"Ah, it's you!" said Pierre with a preoccupied, dissatisfied air.And I, you see, am hard at it." He pointed to his manuscript bookith that air of escaping from the ills of life with which unhappyeople look at their work.
	Prince Andrew, with a beaming, ecstatic expression of renewed lifen his face, paused in front of Pierre and, not noticing his sad look,miled at him with the egotism of joy.
	"Well, dear heart," said he, "I wanted to tell you about itesterday and I have come to do so today. I never experienced anythingike it before. I am in love, my friend!"
	Suddenly Pierre heaved a deep sigh and dumped his heavy personown on the sofa beside Prince Andrew.
	"With Natasha Rostova, yes?" said he.
	"Yes, yes! Who else should it be? I should never have believed it,ut the feeling is stronger than I. Yesterday I tormented myself anduffered, but I would not exchange even that torment for anything inhe world, I have not lived till now. At last I live, but I can't liveithout her! But can she love me?... I am too old for her.... Whyon't you speak?"
	"I? I? What did I tell you?" said Pierre suddenly, rising andeginning to pace up and down the room. "I always thought it....hat girl is such a treasure... she is a rare girl.... My dear friend, entreat you, don't philosophize, don't doubt, marry, marry,arry.... And I am sure there will not be a happier man than you."
	"But what of her?"
	"She loves you."
	"Don't talk rubbish..." said Prince Andrew, smiling and looking intoierre's eyes.
	"She does, I know," Pierre cried fiercely.
	"But do listen," returned Prince Andrew, holding him by the arm. "Doou know the condition I am in? I must talk about it to someone."
	"Well, go on, go on. I am very glad," said Pierre, and his faceeally changed, his brow became smooth, and he listened gladly torince Andrew. Prince Andrew seemed, and really was, quite aifferent, quite a new man. Where was his spleen, his contempt forife, his disillusionment? Pierre was the only person to whom heade up his mind to speak openly; and to him he told all that was inis soul. Now he boldly and lightly made plans for an extended future,aid he could not sacrifice his own happiness to his father's caprice,nd spoke of how he would either make his father consent to thisarriage and love her, or would do without his consent; then hearveled at the feeling that had mastered him as at something strange,part from and independent of himself.
	"I should not have believed anyone who told me that I was capable ofuch love," said Prince Andrew. "It is not at all the same feelinghat I knew in the past. The whole world is now for me divided intowo halves: one half is she, and there all is joy, hope, light: thether half is everything where she is not, and there is all gloomnd darkness...."
	"Darkness and gloom," reiterated Pierre: "yes, yes, I understandhat."
	"I cannot help loving the light, it is not my fault. And I am veryappy! You understand me? I know you are glad for my sake."
	"Yes, yes," Pierre assented, looking at his friend with a touchednd sad expression in his eyes. The brighter Prince Andrew's lotppeared to him, the gloomier seemed his own.BK6|CH23
	CHAPTER XXIII
	Prince Andrew needed his father's consent to his marriage, and tobtain this he started for the country next day.
	His father received his son's communication with external composure,ut inward wrath. He could not comprehend how anyone could wish tolter his life or introduce anything new into it, when his own lifeas already ending. "If only they would let me end my days as I wanto," thought the old man, "then they might do as they please." Withis son, however, he employed the diplomacy he reserved formportant occasions and, adopting a quiet tone, discussed the wholeatter.
	In the first place the marriage was not a brilliant one as regardsirth, wealth, or rank. Secondly, Prince Andrew was no longer as youngs he had been and his health was poor (the old man laid specialtress on this), while she was very young. Thirdly, he had a sonhom it would be a pity to entrust to a chit of a girl. "Fourthlynd finally," the father said, looking ironically at his son, "I begou to put it off for a year: go abroad, take a cure, look out asou wanted to for a German tutor for Prince Nicholas. Then if yourove or passion or obstinacy- as you please- is still as great, marry!nd that's my last word on it. Mind, the last..." concluded therince, in a tone which showed that nothing would make him alter hisecision.
	Prince Andrew saw clearly that the old man hoped that hiseelings, or his fiancee's, would not stand a year's test, or thate (the old prince himself) would die before then, and he decided toonform to his father's wish- to propose, and postpone the wedding for year.
	Three weeks after the last evening he had spent with the Rostovs,rince Andrew returned to Petersburg.
	Next day after her talk with her mother Natasha expected Bolkonskill day, but he did not come. On the second and third day it was theame. Pierre did not come either and Natasha, not knowing thatrince Andrew had gone to see his father, could not explain hisbsence to herself.
	Three weeks passed in this way. Natasha had no desire to go outnywhere and wandered from room to room like a shadow, idle andistless; she wept secretly at night and did not go to her mother inhe evenings. She blushed continually and was irritable. It seemedo her that everybody knew about her disappointment and was laughingt her and pitying her. Strong as was her inward grief, this woundo her vanity intensified her misery.
	Once she came to her mother, tried to say something, and suddenlyegan to cry. Her tears were those of an offended child who does notnow why it is being punished.
	The countess began to soothe Natasha, who after first listening toer mother's words, suddenly interrupted her:
	"Leave off, Mamma! I don't think, and don't want to think aboutt! He just came and then left off, left off..."
	Her voice trembled, and she again nearly cried, but recovered andent on quietly:
	"And I don't at all want to get married. And I am afraid of him; Iave now become quite calm, quite calm."
	The day after this conversation Natasha put on the old dress whichhe knew had the peculiar property of conducing to cheerfulness in theornings, and that day she returned to the old way of life which shead abandoned since the ball. Having finished her morning tea she wento the ballroom, which she particularly liked for its loudesonance, and began singing her solfeggio. When she had finisheder first exercise she stood still in the middle of the room andang a musical phrase that particularly pleased her. She listenedoyfully (as though she had not expected it) to the charm of the noteseverberating, filling the whole empty ballroom, and slowly dyingway; and all at once she felt cheerful. "What's the good of making souch of it? Things are nice as it is," she said to herself, and sheegan walking up and down the room, not stepping simply on theesounding parquet but treading with each step from the heel to theoe (she had on a new and favorite pair of shoes) and listening to theegular tap of the heel and creak of the toe as gladly as she had tohe sounds of her own voice. Passing a mirror she glanced into it.There, that's me!" the expression of her face seemed to say as sheaught sight of herself. "Well, and very nice too! I need nobody."
	A footman wanted to come in to clear away something in the roomut she would not let him, and having closed the door behind himontinued her walk. That morning she had returned to her favoriteood- love of, and delight in, herself. "How charming that Natashas!" she said again, speaking as some third, collective, maleerson. "Pretty, a good voice, young, and in nobody's way if only theyeave her in peace." But however much they left her in peace she couldot now be at peace, and immediately felt this.
	In the hall the porch door opened, and someone asked, "At home?" andhen footsteps were heard. Natasha was looking at the mirror, butid not see herself. She listened to the sounds in the hall. Whenhe saw herself, her face was pale. It was he. She knew this forertain, though she hardly heard his voice through the closed doors.
	Pale and agitated, Natasha ran into the drawing room.
	"Mamma! Bolkonski has come!" she said. "Mamma, it is awful, it isnbearable! I don't want... to be tormented? What am I to do?..."
	Before the countess could answer, Prince Andrew entered the roomith an agitated and serious face. As soon as he saw Natasha hisace brightened. He kissed the countess' hand and Natasha's, and satown beside the sofa.
	"It is long since we had the pleasure..." began the countess, butrince Andrew interrupted her by answering her intended question,bviously in haste to say what he had to.
	"I have not been to see all this time because I have been at myather's. I had to talk over a very important matter with him. Inly got back last night," he said glancing at Natasha; "I want toave a talk with you, Countess," he added after a moment's pause.
	The countess lowered her eyes, sighing deeply.
	"I am at your disposal," she murmured.
	Natasha knew that she ought to go away, but was unable to do so:omething gripped her throat, and regardless of manners she staredtraight at Prince Andrew with wide-open eyes.
	"At once? This instant!... No, it can't be!" she thought.
	Again he glanced at her, and that glance convinced her that sheas not mistaken. Yes, at once, that very instant, her fate would beecided.
	"Go, Natasha! I will call you," said the countess in a whisper.
	Natasha glanced with frightened imploring eyes at Prince Andrewnd at her mother and went out.
	"I have come, Countess, to ask for your daughter's hand," saidrince Andrew.
	The countess' face flushed hotly, but she said nothing.
	"Your offer..." she began at last sedately. He remained silent,ooking into her eyes. "Your offer..." (she grew confused) "isgreeable to us, and I accept your offer. I am glad. And my husband... hope... but it will depend on her...."
	"I will speak to her when I have your consent.... Do you give ito me?" said Prince Andrew.
	"Yes," replied the countess. She held out her hand to him, andith a mixed feeling of estrangement and tenderness pressed her lipso his forehead as he stooped to kiss her hand. She wished to love hims a son, but felt that to her he was a stranger and a terrifying man.I am sure my husband will consent," said the countess, "but yourather..."
	"My father, to whom I have told my plans, has made it an expressondition of his consent that the wedding is not to take place for aear. And I wished to tell you of that," said Prince Andrew.
	"It is true that Natasha is still young, but- so long as that?..."
	"It is unavoidable," said Prince Andrew with a sigh.
	"I will send her to you," said the countess, and left the room.
	"Lord have mercy upon us!" she repeated while seeking her daughter.
	Sonya said that Natasha was in her bedroom. Natasha was sitting onhe bed, pale and dry eyed, and was gazing at the icons and whisperingomething as she rapidly crossed herself. Seeing her mother she jumpedp and flew to her.
	"Well, Mamma?... Well?..."
	"Go, go to him. He is asking for your hand," said the countess,oldly it seemed to Natasha. "Go... go," said the mother, sadly andeproachfully, with a deep sigh, as her daughter ran away.
	Natasha never remembered how she entered the drawing room. Whenhe came in and saw him she paused. "Is it possible that this strangeras now become everything to me?" she asked herself, and immediatelynswered, "Yes, everything! He alone is now dearer to me thanverything in the world." Prince Andrew came up to her with downcastyes.
	"I have loved you from the very first moment I saw you. May I hope?"
	He looked at her and was struck by the serious impassionedxpression of her face. Her face said: "Why ask? Why doubt what youannot but know? Why speak, when words cannot express what one feels?"
	She drew near to him and stopped. He took her hand and kissed it.
	"Do you love me?"
	"Yes, yes!" Natasha murmured as if in vexation. Then she sighedoudly and, catching her breath more and more quickly, began to sob.
	"What is it? What's the matter?"
	"Oh, I am so happy!" she replied, smiled through her tears, bentver closer to him, paused for an instant as if asking herself whetherhe might, and then kissed him.
	Prince Andrew held her hands, looked into her eyes, and did not findn his heart his former love for her. Something in him had suddenlyhanged; there was no longer the former poetic and mystic charm ofesire, but there was pity for her feminine and childish weakness,ear at her devotion and trustfulness, and an oppressive yet joyfulense of the duty that now bound him to her forever. The presenteeling, though not so bright and poetic as the former, was strongernd more serious.
	"Did your mother tell you that it cannot be for a year?" askedrince Andrew, still looking into her eyes.
	"Is it possible that I- the 'chit of a girl,' as everybody callede," thought Natasha- "is it possible that I am now to be the wife andhe equal of this strange, dear, clever man whom even my fatherooks up to? Can it be true? Can it be true that there can be noore playing with life, that now I am grown up, that on me now lies responsibility for my every word and deed? Yes, but what did hesk me?"
	"No," she replied, but she had not understood his question.
	"Forgive me!" he said. "But you are so young, and I have alreadyeen through so much in life. I am afraid for you, you do not yet knowourself."
	Natasha listened with concentrated attention, trying but failingo take in the meaning of his words.
	"Hard as this year which delays my happiness will be," continuedrince Andrew, "it will give you time to be sure of yourself. I askou to make me happy in a year, but you are free: our engagement shallemain a secret, and should you find that you do not love me, orhould you come to love..." said Prince Andrew with an unnaturalmile.
	"Why do you say that?" Natasha interrupted him. "You know thatrom the very day you first came to Otradnoe I have loved you," sheried, quite convinced that she spoke the truth.
	"In a year you will learn to know yourself...."
	"A whole year!" Natasha repeated suddenly, only now realizing thathe marriage was to be postponed for a year. "But why a year? Why aear?..."
	Prince Andrew began to explain to her the reasons for this delay.atasha did not hear him.
	"And can't it be helped?" she asked. Prince Andrew did not reply,ut his face expressed the impossibility of altering that decision.
	"It's awful! Oh, it's awful! awful!" Natasha suddenly cried, andgain burst into sobs. "I shall die, waiting a year: it'smpossible, it's awful!" She looked into her lover's face and saw int a look of commiseration and perplexity.
	"No, no! I'll do anything!" she said, suddenly checking her tears.I am so happy."
	The father and mother came into the room and gave the betrothedouple their blessing.
	From that day Prince Andrew began to frequent the Rostovs' asatasha's affianced lover.BK6|CH24
	CHAPTER XXIV
	No betrothal ceremony took place and Natasha's engagement toolkonski was not announced; Prince Andrew insisted on that. He saidhat as he was responsible for the delay he ought to bear the wholeurden of it; that he had given his word and bound himself forever,ut that he did not wish to bind Natasha and gave her perfect freedom.f after six months she felt that she did not love him she wouldave full right to reject him. Naturally neither Natasha nor herarents wished to hear of this, but Prince Andrew was firm. He camevery day to the Rostovs', but did not behave to Natasha as anffianced lover: he did not use the familiar thou, but said you toer, and kissed only her hand. After their engagement, quiteifferent, intimate, and natural relations sprang up between them.t was as if they had not known each other till now. Both liked toecall how they had regarded each other when as yet they wereothing to one another; they felt themselves now quite differenteings: then they were artificial, now natural and sincere. At firsthe family felt some constraint in intercourse with Prince Andrew;e seemed a man from another world, and for a long time Natasharained the family to get used to him, proudly assuring them allhat he only appeared to be different, but was really just like all ofhem, and that she was not afraid of him and no one else ought toe. After a few days they grew accustomed to him, and withoutestraint in his presence pursued their usual way of life, in which heook his part. He could talk about rural economy with the count,ashions with the countess and Natasha, and about albums and fancyworkith Sonya. Sometimes the household both among themselves and in hisresence expressed their wonder at how it had all happened, and at thevident omens there had been of it: Prince Andrew's coming to Otradnoend their coming to Petersburg, and the likeness between Natasha andrince Andrew which her nurse had noticed on his first visit, andndrew's encounter with Nicholas in 1805, and many other incidentsetokening that it had to be.
	In the house that poetic dullness and quiet reigned which alwaysccompanies the presence of a betrothed couple. Often when all sittingogether everyone kept silent. Sometimes the others would get up ando away and the couple, left alone, still remained silent. They rarelypoke of their future life. Prince Andrew was afraid and ashamed topeak of it. Natasha shared this as she did all his feelings, whichhe constantly divined. Once she began questioning him about hison. Prince Andrew blushed, as he often did now- Natashaarticularly liked it in him- and said that his son would not liveith them.
	"Why not?" asked Natasha in a frightened tone.
	"I cannot take him away from his grandfather, and besides..."
	"How I should have loved him!" said Natasha, immediately guessingis thought; "but I know you wish to avoid any pretext for findingault with us."
	Sometimes the old count would come up, kiss Prince Andrew, and askis advice about Petya's education or Nicholas' service. The oldountess sighed as she looked at them; Sonya was always gettingrightened lest she should be in the way and tried to find excuses foreaving them alone, even when they did not wish it. When Prince Andrewpoke (he could tell a story very well), Natasha listened to himith pride; when she spoke she noticed with fear and joy that he gazedttentively and scrutinizingly at her. She asked herself inerplexity: "What does he look for in me? He is trying to discoveromething by looking at me! What if what he seeks in me is not there?"ometimes she fell into one of the mad, merry moods characteristicf her, and then she particularly loved to hear and see how Princendrew laughed. He seldom laughed, but when he did he abandonedimself entirely to his laughter, and after such a laugh she alwayselt nearer to him. Natasha would have been completely happy if thehought of the separation awaiting her and drawing near had noterrified her, just as the mere thought of it made him turn pale andold.
	On the eve of his departure from Petersburg Prince Andrew broughtith him Pierre, who had not been to the Rostovs' once since the ball.ierre seemed disconcerted and embarrassed. He was talking to theountess, and Natasha sat down beside a little chess table with Sonya,hereby inviting Prince Andrew to come too. He did so.
	"You have known Bezukhov a long time?" he asked. "Do you like him?"
	"Yes, he's a dear, but very absurd."
	And as usual when speaking of Pierre, she began to tell anecdotes ofis absent-mindedness, some of which had even been invented about him.
	"Do you know I have entrusted him with our secret? I have knownim from childhood. He has a heart of gold. I beg you, Natalie,"rince Andrew said with sudden seriousness- "I am going away andeaven knows what may happen. You may cease to... all right, I know am not to say that. Only this, then: whatever may happen to you when am not here..."
	"What can happen?"
	"Whatever trouble may come," Prince Andrew continued, "I beg you,ademoiselle Sophie, whatever may happen, to turn to him alone fordvice and help! He is a most absent-minded and absurd fellow, bute has a heart of gold."
	Neither her father, nor her mother, nor Sonya, nor Prince Andrewimself could have foreseen how the separation from her lover wouldct on Natasha. Flushed and agitated she went about the house all thatay, dry-eyed, occupied with most trivial matters as if notnderstanding what awaited her. She did not even cry when, on takingeave, he kissed her hand for the last time. "Don't go!" she said in aone that made him wonder whether he really ought not to stay andhich he remembered long afterwards. Nor did she cry when he was gone;ut for several days she sat in her room dry-eyed, taking nonterest in anything and only saying now and then, "Oh, why did heo away?"
	But a fortnight after his departure, to the surprise of those arounder, she recovered from her mental sickness just as suddenly andecame her old self again, but with a change in her moral physiognomy,s a child gets up after a long illness with a changed expression oface.BK6|CH25
	CHAPTER XXV
	During that year after his son's departure, Prince Nicholasolkonski's health and temper became much worse. He grew still morerritable, and it was Princess Mary who generally bore the brunt ofis frequent fits of unprovoked anger. He seemed carefully to seek outer tender spots so as to torture her mentally as harshly as possible.rincess Mary had two passions and consequently two joys- herephew, little Nicholas, and religion- and these were the favoriteubjects of the prince's attacks and ridicule. Whatever was spokenf he would bring round to the superstitiousness of old maids, orhe petting and spoiling of children. "You want to make him"- littleicholas- "into an old maid like yourself! A pity! Prince Andrew wants son and not an old maid," he would say. Or, turning toademoiselle Bourienne, he would ask her in Princess Mary's presenceow she liked our village priests and icons and would joke about them.
	He continually hurt Princess Mary's feelings and tormented her,ut it cost her no effort to forgive him. Could he be to blameoward her, or could her father, whom she knew loved her in spite oft all, be unjust? And what is justice? The princess never thoughtf that proud word "justice." All the complex laws of man centered forer in one clear and simple law- the law of love and self-sacrificeaught us by Him who lovingly suffered for mankind though He Himselfas God. What had she to do with the justice or injustice of othereople? She had to endure and love, and that she did.
	During the winter Prince Andrew had come to Bald Hills and hadeen gay, gentle, and more affectionate than Princess Mary had knownim for a long time past. She felt that something had happened to him,ut he said nothing to her about his love. Before he left he had aong talk with his father about something, and Princess Mary noticedhat before his departure they were dissatisfied with one another.
	Soon after Prince Andrew had gone, Princess Mary wrote to her friendulie Karagina in Petersburg, whom she had dreamed (as all girlsream) of marrying to her brother, and who was at that time inourning for her own brother, killed in Turkey.
	Sorrow, it seems, is our common lot, my dear, tender friend Julie.
	Your loss is so terrible that I can only explain it to myself as apecial providence of God who, loving you, wishes to try you andour excellent mother. Oh, my friend! Religion, and religion alone,an- I will not say comfort us- but save us from despair. Religionlone can explain to us what without its help man cannot comprehend:hy, for what cause, kind and noble beings able to find happiness inife- not merely harming no one but necessary to the happiness ofthers- are called away to God, while cruel, useless, harmful persons,r such as are a burden to themselves and to others, are leftiving. The first death I saw, and one I shall never forget- that ofy dear sister-in-law- left that impression on me. Just as you askestiny why your splendid brother had to die, so I asked why thatngel Lise, who not only never wronged anyone, but in whose soul thereere never any unkind thoughts, had to die. And what do you think,ear friend? Five years have passed since then, and already I, with myetty understanding, begin to see clearly why she had to die, and inhat way that death was but an expression of the infinite goodnessf the Creator, whose every action, though generallyncomprehensible to us, is but a manifestation of His infinite loveor His creatures. Perhaps, I often think, she was too angelicallynnocent to have the strength to perform all a mother's duties. As aoung wife she was irreproachable; perhaps she could not have beeno as a mother. As it is, not only has she left us, and particularlyrince Andrew, with the purest regrets and memories, but probablyhe will there receive a place I dare not hope for myself. But noto speak of her alone, that early and terrible death has had theost beneficent influence on me and on my brother in spite of allur grief. Then, at the moment of our loss, these thoughts could notccur to me; I should then have dismissed them with horror, but nowhey are very clear and certain. I write all this to you, dear friend,nly to convince you of the Gospel truth which has become for me arinciple of life: not a single hair of our heads will fall withoutis will. And His will is governed only by infinite love for us, ando whatever befalls us is for our good.
	You ask whether we shall spend next winter in Moscow. In spite of myish to see you, I do not think so and do not want to do so. Youill be surprised to hear that the reason for this is Buonaparte!he case is this: my father's health is growing noticeably worse, heannot stand any contradiction and is becoming irritable. Thisrritability is, as you know, chiefly directed to political questions.e cannot endure the notion that Buonaparte is negotiating on equalerms with all the sovereigns of Europe and particularly with our own,he grandson of the Great Catherine! As you know, I am quitendifferent to politics, but from my father's remarks and his talksith Michael Ivanovich I know all that goes on in the world andspecially about the honors conferred on Buonaparte, who only atald Hills in the whole world, it seems, is not accepted as a greatan, still less as Emperor of France. And my father cannot stand this.t seems to me that it is chiefly because of his political viewshat my father is reluctant to speak of going to Moscow; for heoresees the encounters that would result from his way of expressingis views regardless of anybody. All the benefit he might deriverom a course of treatment he would lose as a result of the disputesbout Buonaparte which would be inevitable. In any case it will beecided very shortly.
	Our family life goes on in the old way except for my brotherndrew's absence. He, as I wrote you before, has changed very muchf late. After his sorrow he only this year quite recovered hispirits. He has again become as I used to know him when a child: kind,ffectionate, with that heart of gold to which I know no equal. He hasealized, it seems to me, that life is not over for him. Butogether with this mental change he has grown physically mucheaker. He has become thinner and more nervous. I am anxious about himnd glad he is taking this trip abroad which the doctors recommendedong ago. I hope it will cure him. You write that in Petersburg hes spoken of as one of the most active, cultivated, and capable of theoung men. Forgive my vanity as a relation, but I never doubted it.he good he has done to everybody here, from his peasants up to theentry, is incalculable. On his arrival in Petersburg he received onlyis due. I always wonder at the way rumors fly from Petersburg tooscow, especially such false ones as that you write about- I mean theeport of my brother's betrothal to the little Rostova. I do not thinky brother will ever marry again, and certainly not her; and this ishy: first, I know that though he rarely speaks about the wife heas lost, the grief of that loss has gone too deep in his heart forim ever to decide to give her a successor and our little angel atepmother. Secondly because, as far as I know, that girl is not theind of girl who could please Prince Andrew. I do not think he wouldhoose her for a wife, and frankly I do not wish it. But I amunning on too long and am at the end of my second sheet. Good-by,y dear friend. May God keep you in His holy and mighty care. Myear friend, Mademoiselle Bourienne, sends you kisses.
	                                                    MARYBK6|CH26
	CHAPTER XXVI
	In the middle of the summer Princess Mary received an unexpectedetter from Prince Andrew in Switzerland in which he gave hertrange and surprising news. He informed her of his engagement toatasha Rostova. The whole letter breathed loving rapture for hisetrothed and tender and confiding affection for his sister. Herote that he had never loved as he did now and that only now did henderstand and know what life was. He asked his sister to forgiveim for not having told her of his resolve when he had last visitedald Hills, though he had spoken of it to his father. He had notone so for fear Princess Mary should ask her father to give hisonsent, irritating him and having to bear the brunt of hisispleasure without attaining her object. "Besides," he wrote, "theatter was not then so definitely settled as it is now. My father thennsisted on a delay of a year and now already six months, half of thateriod, have passed, and my resolution is firmer than ever. If theoctors did not keep me here at the spas I should be back in Russia,ut as it is I have to postpone my return for three months. You knowe and my relations with Father. I want nothing from him. I haveeen and always shall be independent; but to go against his will androuse his anger, now that he may perhaps remain with us such ahort time, would destroy half my happiness. I am now writing to himbout the same question, and beg you to choose a good moment to handim the letter and to let me know how he looks at the whole matter andhether there is hope that he may consent to reduce the term by fouronths."
	After long hesitations, doubts, and prayers, Princess Mary gavehe letter to her father. The next day the old prince said to heruietly:
	"Write and tell your brother to wait till I am dead.... It won'te long- I shall soon set him free."
	The princess was about to reply, but her father would not let herpeak and, raising his voice more and more, cried:
	"Marry, marry, my boy!... A good family!... Clever people, eh? Rich,h? Yes, a nice stepmother little Nicholas will have! Write and tellim that he may marry tomorrow if he likes. She will be littleicholas' stepmother and I'll marry Bourienne!... Ha, ha, ha! Heustn't be without a stepmother either! Only one thing, no moreomen are wanted in my house- let him marry and live by himself.erhaps you will go and live with him too?" he added, turning torincess Mary. "Go in heavens name! Go out into the frost... therost... the frost!
	After this outburst the prince did not speak any more about theatter. But repressed vexation at his son's poor-spirited behavioround expression in his treatment of his daughter. To his formerretexts for irony a fresh one was now added- allusions to stepmothersnd amiabilities to Mademoiselle Bourienne.
	"Why shouldn't I marry her?" he asked his daughter. "She'll make aplendid princess!"
	And latterly, to her surprise and bewilderment, Princess Maryoticed that her father was really associating more and more withhe Frenchwoman. She wrote to Prince Andrew about the reception of hisetter, but comforted him with hopes of reconciling their father tohe idea.
	Little Nicholas and his education, her brother Andrew, andeligion were Princess Mary's joys and consolations; but besides that,ince everyone must have personal hopes, Princess Mary in therofoundest depths of her heart had a hidden dream and hope thatupplied the chief consolation of her life. This comforting dreamnd hope were given her by God's folk- the half-witted and otherilgrims who visited her without the prince's knowledge. The longerhe lived, the more experience and observation she had of life, thereater was her wonder at the short-sightedness of men who seeknjoyment and happiness here on earth: toiling, suffering, struggling,nd harming one another, to obtain that impossible, visionary,inful happiness. Prince Andrew had loved his wife, she died, but thatas not enough: he wanted to bind his happiness to another woman.er father objected to this because he wanted a more distinguished andealthier match for Andrew. And they all struggled and suffered andormented one another and injured their souls, their eternal souls,or the attainment of benefits which endure but for an instant. Notnly do we know this ourselves, but Christ, the Son of God, cameown to earth and told us that this life is but for a moment and is probation; yet we cling to it and think to find happiness in it.How is it that no one realizes this?" thought Princess Mary. "None except these despised God's folk who, wallet on back, come to mey the back door, afraid of being seen by the prince, not for fearf ill-usage by him but for fear of causing him to sin. To leaveamily, home, and all the cares of worldly welfare, in order withoutlinging to anything to wander in hempen rags from place to placender an assumed name, doing no one any harm but praying for all-or those who drive one away as well as for those who protect one:igher than that life and truth there is no life or truth!"
	There was one pilgrim, a quiet pockmarked little woman of fiftyalled Theodosia, who for over thirty years had gone about barefootnd worn heavy chains. Princess Mary was particularly fond of her.nce, when in a room with a lamp dimly lit before the icon Theodosiaas talking of her life, the thought that Theodosia alone had foundhe true path of life suddenly came to Princess Mary with such forcehat she resolved to become a pilgrim herself. When Theodosia had goneo sleep Princess Mary thought about this for a long time, and at lastade up her mind that, strange as it might seem, she must go on ailgrimage. She disclosed this thought to no one but to her confessor,ather Akinfi, the monk, and he approved of her intention. Under guisef a present for the pilgrims, Princess Mary prepared a pilgrim'somplete costume for herself: a coarse smock, bast shoes, a roughoat, and a black kerchief. Often, approaching the chest of drawersontaining this secret treasure, Princess Mary paused, uncertainhether the time had not already come to put her project intoxecution.
	Often, listening to the pilgrims' tales, she was so stimulated byheir simple speech, mechanical to them but to her so full of deepeaning, that several times she was on the point of abandoningverything and running away from home. In imagination she alreadyictured herself by Theodosia's side, dressed in coarse rags,alking with a staff, a wallet on her back, along the dusty road,irecting her wanderings from one saint's shrine to another, free fromnvy, earthly love, or desire, and reaching at last the place wherehere is no more sorrow or sighing, but eternal joy and bliss.
	"I shall come to a place and pray there, and before having time toet used to it or getting to love it, I shall go farther. I will go onill my legs fail, and I'll lie down and die somewhere, and shall atast reach that eternal, quiet haven, where there is neither sorrowor sighing..." thought Princess Mary.
	But afterwards, when she saw her father and especially little KokoNicholas), her resolve weakened. She wept quietly, and felt thathe was a sinner who loved her father and little nephew more than God.BK7	                           BOOK SEVEN: 1810 - 11BK7|CH1
	CHAPTER I
	The Bible legend tells us that the absence of labor- idleness- was aondition of the first man's blessedness before the Fall. Fallen manas retained a love of idleness, but the curse weighs on the raceot only because we have to seek our bread in the sweat of ourrows, but because our moral nature is such that we cannot be bothdle and at ease. An inner voice tells us we are in the wrong if were idle. If man could find a state in which he felt that thoughdle he was fulfilling his duty, he would have found one of theonditions of man's primitive blessedness. And such a state ofbligatory and irreproachable idleness is the lot of a whole class-he military. The chief attraction of military service has consistednd will consist in this compulsory and irreproachable idleness.
	Nicholas Rostov experienced this blissful condition to the fullhen, after 1807, he continued to serve in the Pavlograd regiment,n which he already commanded the squadron he had taken over fromenisov.
	Rostov had become a bluff, good-natured fellow, whom his Moscowcquaintances would have considered rather bad form, but who was likednd respected by his comrades, subordinates, and superiors, and wasell contented with his life. Of late, in 1809, he found in lettersrom home more frequent complaints from his mother that theirffairs were falling into greater and greater disorder, and that itas time for him to come back to gladden and comfort his old parents.
	Reading these letters, Nicholas felt a dread of their wanting toake him away from surroundings in which, protected from all thentanglements of life, he was living so calmly and quietly. He felthat sooner or later he would have to re-enter that whirlpool of life,ith its embarrassments and affairs to be straightened out, itsccounts with stewards, quarrels, and intrigues, its ties, society,nd with Sonya's love and his promise to her. It was all dreadfullyifficult and complicated; and he replied to his mother in cold,ormal letters in French, beginning: "My dear Mamma," and ending:Your obedient son," which said nothing of when he would return. In810 he received letters from his parents, in which they told him ofatasha's engagement to Bolkonski, and that the wedding would be in year's time because the old prince made difficulties. This letterrieved and mortified Nicholas. In the first place he was sorry thatatasha, for whom he cared more than for anyone else in the family,hould be lost to the home; and secondly, from his hussar point ofiew, he regretted not to have been there to show that fellowolkonski that connection with him was no such great honor afterll, and that if he loved Natasha he might dispense with permissionrom his dotard father. For a moment he hesitated whether he shouldot apply for leave in order to see Natasha before she was married,ut then came the maneuvers, and considerations about Sonya andbout the confusion of their affairs, and Nicholas again put it off.ut in the spring of that year, he received a letter from hisother, written without his father's knowledge, and that letterersuaded him to return. She wrote that if he did not come and takeatters in hand, their whole property would be sold by auction andhey would all have to go begging. The count was so weak, andrusted Mitenka so much, and was so good-natured, that everybodyook advantage of him and things were going from bad to worse. "Forod's sake, I implore you, come at once if you do not wish to makee and the whole family wretched," wrote the countess.
	This letter touched Nicholas. He had that common sense of aatter-of-fact man which showed him what he ought to do.
	The right thing now was, if not to retire from the service, at anyate to go home on leave. Why he had to go he did not know; butfter his after-dinner nap he gave orders to saddle Mars, an extremelyicious gray stallion that had not been ridden for a long time, andhen he returned with the horse all in a lather, he informed LavrushkaDenisov's servant who had remained with him) and his comrades whourned up in the evening that he was applying for leave and wasoing home. Difficult and strange as it was for him to reflect that heould go away without having heard from the staff- and this interestedim extremely- whether he was promoted to a captaincy or would receivehe Order of St. Anne for the last maneuvers; strange as it was tohink that he would go away without having sold his three roans to theolish Count Golukhovski, who was bargaining for the horses Rostov hadetted he would sell for two thousand rubles; incomprehensible as iteemed that the ball the hussars were giving in honor of the Polishademoiselle Przazdziecka (out of rivalry to the Uhlans who hadiven one in honor of their Polish Mademoiselle Borzozowska) wouldake place without him- he knew he must go away from this good, brightorld to somewhere where everything was stupid and confused. A weekater he obtained his leave. His hussar comrades- not only those ofis own regiment, but the whole brigade- gave Rostov a dinner to whichhe subscription was fifteen rubles a head, and at which there werewo bands and two choirs of singers. Rostov danced the Trepak withajor Basov; the tipsy officers tossed, embraced, and droppedostov; the soldiers of the third squadron tossed him too, and shoutedhurrah!" and then they put him in his sleigh and escorted him asar as the first post station.
	During the first half of the journey- from Kremenchug to Kiev- allostov's thoughts, as is usual in such cases, were behind him, withhe squadron; but when he had gone more than halfway he began toorget his three roans and Dozhoyveyko, his quartermaster, and toonder anxiously how things would be at Otradnoe and what he wouldind there. Thoughts of home grew stronger the nearer he approachedt- far stronger, as though this feeling of his was subject to the lawy which the force of attraction is in inverse proportion to thequare of the distance. At the last post station before Otradnoe heave the driver a three-ruble tip, and on arriving he ranreathlessly, like a boy, up the steps of his home.
	After the rapture of meeting, and after that odd feeling ofnsatisfied expectation- the feeling that "everything is just theame, so why did I hurry?"- Nicholas began to settle down in his oldome world. His father and mother were much the same, only a littlelder. What was new in them was a certain uneasiness and occasionaliscord, which there used not to be, and which, as Nicholas soon foundut, was due to the bad state of their affairs. Sonya was nearlywenty; she had stopped growing prettier and promised nothing morehan she was already, but that was enough. She exhaled happiness andove from the time Nicholas returned, and the faithful, unalterableove of this girl had a gladdening effect on him. Petya and Natashaurprised Nicholas most. Petya was a big handsome boy of thirteen,erry, witty, and mischievous, with a voice that was already breaking.s for Natasha, for a long while Nicholas wondered and laughedhenever he looked at her.
	"You're not the same at all," he said.
	"How? Am I uglier?"
	"On the contrary, but what dignity? A princess!" he whispered toer.
	"Yes, yes, yes!" cried Natasha, joyfully.
	She told him about her romance with Prince Andrew and of his visito Otradnoe and showed him his last letter.
	"Well, are you glad?" Natasha asked. "I am so tranquil and happyow."
	"Very glad," answered Nicholas. "He is an excellent fellow.... Andre you very much in love?"
	"How shall I put it?" replied Natasha. "I was in love with Boris,ith my teacher, and with Denisov, but this is quite different. I feelt peace and settled. I know that no better man than he exists, and am calm and contented now. Not at all as before."
	Nicholas expressed his disapproval of the postponement of thearriage for a year; but Natasha attacked her brother withxasperation, proving to him that it could not be otherwise, andhat it would be a bad thing to enter a family against the father'sill, and that she herself wished it so.
	"You don't at all understand," she said.
	Nicholas was silent and agreed with her.
	Her brother often wondered as he looked at her. She did not seemt all like a girl in love and parted from her affianced husband.he was even-tempered and calm and quite as cheerful as of old. Thismazed Nicholas and even made him regard Bolkonski's courtshipkeptically. He could not believe that her fate was sealed, especiallys he had not seen her with Prince Andrew. It always seemed to himhat there was something not quite right about this intended marriage.
	"Why this delay? Why no betrothal?" he thought. Once, when he hadouched on this topic with his mother, he discovered, to hisurprise and somewhat to his satisfaction, that in the depth of heroul she too had doubts about this marriage.
	"You see he writes," said she, showing her son a letter of Princendrew's, with that latent grudge a mother always has in regard to aaughter's future married happiness, "he writes that he won't comeefore December. What can be keeping him? Illness, probably! Hisealth is very delicate. Don't tell Natasha. And don't attachmportance to her being so bright: that's because she's living throughhe last days of her girlhood, but I know what she is like everyime we receive a letter from him! However, God grant thatverything turns out well!" (She always ended with these words.) "Hes an excellent man!"BK7|CH2
	CHAPTER II
	After reaching home Nicholas was at first serious and even dull.e was worried by the impending necessity of interfering in the stupidusiness matters for which his mother had called him home. To throwff this burden as quickly as possible, on the third day after hisrrival he went, angry and scowling and without answering questions aso where he was going, to Mitenka's lodge and demanded an account ofverything. But what an account of everything might be Nicholas knewven less than the frightened and bewildered Mitenka. The conversationnd the examination of the accounts with Mitenka did not last long.he village elder, a peasant delegate, and the village clerk, who wereaiting in the passage, heard with fear and delight first the youngount's voice roaring and snapping and rising louder and louder, andhen words of abuse, dreadful words, ejaculated one after the other.
	"Robber!... Ungrateful wretch!... I'll hack the dog to pieces! I'mot my father!... Robbing us!..." and so on.
	Then with no less fear and delight they saw how the young count, redn the face and with bloodshot eyes, dragged Mitenka out by the scrufff the neck and applied his foot and knee to him behind with greatgility at convenient moments between the words, shouting, "Be off!ever let me see your face here again, you villain!"
	Mitenka flew headlong down the six steps and ran away into thehrubbery. (This shrubbery was a well-known haven of refuge forulprits at Otradnoe. Mitenka himself, returning tipsy from theown, used to hide there, and many of the residents at Otradnoe,iding from Mitenka, knew of its protective qualities.)
	Mitenka's wife and sisters-in-law thrust their heads andrightened faces out of the door of a room where a bright samovaras boiling and where the steward's high bedstead stood with itsatchwork quilt.
	The young count paid no heed to them, but, breathing hard, passed byith resolute strides and went into the house.
	The countess, who heard at once from the maids what had happenedt the lodge, was calmed by the thought that now their affairs wouldertainly improve, but on the other hand felt anxious as to the effecthis excitement might have on her son. She went several times to hisoor on tiptoe and listened, as he lighted one pipe after another.
	Next day the old count called his son aside and, with an embarrassedmile, said to him:
	"But you know, my dear boy, it's a pity you got excited! Mitenka hasold me all about it."
	"I knew," thought Nicholas, "that I should never understand anythingn this crazy world."
	"You were angry that he had not entered those 700 rubles. But theyere carried forward- and you did not look at the other page."
	"Papa, he is a blackguard and a thief! I know he is! And what I haveone, I have done; but, if you like, I won't speak to him again."
	"No, my dear boy" (the count, too, felt embarrassed. He knew head mismanaged his wife's property and was to blame toward hishildren, but he did not know how to remedy it). "No, I beg you tottend to the business. I am old. I..."
	"No, Papa. Forgive me if I have caused you unpleasantness. Inderstand it all less than you do."
	"Devil take all these peasants, and money matters, and carryingsorward from page to page," he thought. "I used to understand what acorner' and the stakes at cards meant, but carrying forward tonother page I don't understand at all," said he to himself, and afterhat he did not meddle in business affairs. But once the countessalled her son and informed him that she had a promissory note fromnna Mikhaylovna for two thousand rubles, and asked him what hehought of doing with it.
	"This," answered Nicholas. "You say it rests with me. Well, Ion't like Anna Mikhaylovna and I don't like Boris, but they wereur friends and poor. Well then, this!" and he tore up the note, andy so doing caused the old countess to weep tears of joy. Afterhat, young Rostov took no further part in any business affairs, butevoted himself with passionate enthusiasm to what was to him a newursuit- the chase- for which his father kept a large establishment.BK7|CH3
	CHAPTER III
	The weather was already growing wintry and morning frostsongealed an earth saturated by autumn rains. The verdure hadhickened and its bright green stood out sharply against therownish strips of winter rye trodden down by the cattle, andgainst the pale-yellow stubble of the spring buckwheat. The woodedavines and the copses, which at the end of August had still beenreen islands amid black fields and stubble, had become golden andright-red islands amid the green winter rye. The hares had alreadyalf changed their summer coats, the fox cubs were beginning tocatter, and the young wolves were bigger than dogs. It was the bestime of the year for the chase. The hounds of that ardent youngportsman Rostov had not merely reached hard winter condition, butere so jaded that at a meeting of the huntsmen it was decided to givehem a three days' rest and then, on the sixteenth of September, to gon a distant expedition, starting from the oak grove where there wasn undisturbed litter of wolf cubs.
	All that day the hounds remained at home. It was frosty and their was sharp, but toward evening the sky became overcast and it begano thaw. On the fifteenth, when young Rostov, in his dressing gown,ooked out of the window, he saw it was an unsurpassable morning forunting: it was as if the sky were melting and sinking to the earthithout any wind. The only motion in the air was that of the dripping,icroscopic particles of drizzling mist. The bare twigs in thearden were hung with transparent drops which fell on the freshlyallen leaves. The earth in the kitchen garden looked wet and blacknd glistened like poppy seed and at a short distance merged intohe dull, moist veil of mist. Nicholas went out into the wet and muddyorch. There was a smell of decaying leaves and of dog. Milka, alack-spotted, broad-haunched bitch with prominent black eyes, gotp on seeing her master, stretched her hind legs, lay down like aare, and then suddenly jumped up and licked him right on his nose andustache. Another borzoi, a dog, catching sight of his master from thearden path, arched his back and, rushing headlong toward the porchith lifted tail, began rubbing himself against his legs.
	"O-hoy!" came at that moment, that inimitable huntsman's callhich unites the deepest bass with the shrillest tenor, and roundhe corner came Daniel the head huntsman and head kennelman, a gray,rinkled old man with hair cut straight over his forehead, Ukrainianashion, a long bent whip in his hand, and that look of independencend scorn of everything that is only seen in huntsmen. He doffed hisircassian cap to his master and looked at him scornfully. Thiscorn was not offensive to his master. Nicholas knew that this Daniel,isdainful of everybody and who considered himself above them, was allhe same his serf and huntsman.
	"Daniel!" Nicholas said timidly, conscious at the sight of theeather, the hounds, and the huntsman that he was being carried awayy that irresistible passion for sport which makes a man forget allis previous resolutions, as a lover forgets in the presence of hisistress.
	"What orders, your excellency?" said the huntsman in his deepass, deep as a proto-deacon's and hoarse with hallooing- and twolashing black eyes gazed from under his brows at his master, whoas silent. "Can you resist it?" those eyes seemed to be asking.
	"It's a good day, eh? For a hunt and a gallop, eh?" askedicholas, scratching Milka behind the ears.
	Daniel did not answer, but winked instead.
	"I sent Uvarka at dawn to listen," his bass boomed out after ainute's pause. "He says she's moved them into the Otradnoe enclosure.hey were howling there." (This meant that the she-wolf, about whomhey both knew, had moved with her cubs to the Otradnoe copse, a smalllace a mile and a half from the house.)
	"We ought to go, don't you think so?" said Nicholas. "Come to meith Uvarka."
	"As you please."
	"Then put off feeding them."
	"Yes, sir."
	Five minutes later Daniel and Uvarka were standing in Nicholas'ig study. Though Daniel was not a big man, to see him in a room wasike seeing a horse or a bear on the floor among the furniture andurroundings of human life. Daniel himself felt this, and as usualtood just inside the door, trying to speak softly and not move, forear of breaking something in the master's apartment, and heastened to say all that was necessary so as to get from under thateiling, out into the open under the sky once more.
	Having finished his inquiries and extorted from Daniel an opinionhat the hounds were fit (Daniel himself wished to go hunting),icholas ordered the horses to be saddled. But just as Daniel wasbout to go Natasha came in with rapid steps, not having done up herair or finished dressing and with her old nurse's big shawl wrappedound her. Petya ran in at the same time.
	"You are going?" asked Natasha. "I knew you would! Sonya said yououldn't go, but I knew that today is the sort of day when yououldn't help going."
	"Yes, we are going," replied Nicholas reluctantly, for today, ase intended to hunt seriously, he did not want to take Natasha andetya. "We are going, but only wolf hunting: it would be dull forou."
	"You know it is my greatest pleasure," said Natasha. "It's not fair;ou are going by yourself, are having the horses saddled and saidothing to us about it."
	"'No barrier bars a Russian's path'- we'll go!" shouted Petya.
	"But you can't. Mamma said you mustn't," said Nicholas to Natasha.
	"Yes, I'll go. I shall certainly go," said Natasha decisively.Daniel, tell them to saddle for us, and Michael must come with myogs," she added to the huntsman.
	It seemed to Daniel irksome and improper to be in a room at all, buto have anything to do with a young lady seemed to him impossible.e cast down his eyes and hurried out as if it were none of hisusiness, careful as he went not to inflict any accidental injury onhe young lady.BK7|CH4
	CHAPTER IV
	The old count, who had always kept up an enormous huntingstablishment but had now handed it all completely over to his son'sare, being in very good spirits on this fifteenth of September,repared to go out with the others.
	In an hour's time the whole hunting party was at the porch.icholas, with a stern and serious air which showed that now was noime for attending to trifles, went past Natasha and Petya who wererying to tell him something. He had a look at all the details ofhe hunt, sent a pack of hounds and huntsmen on ahead to find theuarry, mounted his chestnut Donets, and whistling to his own leash oforzois, set off across the threshing ground to a field leading to thetradnoe wood. The old count's horse, a sorrel gelding callediflyanka, was led by the groom in attendance on him, while theount himself was to drive in a small trap straight to a spot reservedor him.
	They were taking fifty-four hounds, with six hunt attendants andhippers-in. Besides the family, there were eight borzoi kennelmen andore than forty borzois, so that, with the borzois on the leashelonging to members of the family, there were about a hundred andhirty dogs and twenty horsemen.
	Each dog knew its master and its call. Each man in the hunt knew hisusiness. his place, what he had to do. As soon as they had passed theence they all spread out evenly and quietly, without noise or talk,long the road and field leading to the Otradnoe covert.
	The horses stepped over the field as over a thick carpet, now andhen splashing into puddles as they crossed a road. The misty skytill seemed to descend evenly and imperceptibly toward the earth, their was still, warm, and silent. Occasionally the whistle of auntsman, the snort of a horse, the crack of a whip, or the whine of atraggling hound could be heard.
	When they had gone a little less than a mile, five more ridersith dogs appeared out of the mist, approaching the Rostovs. Inront rode a fresh-looking, handsome old man with a large grayustache.
	"Good morning, Uncle!" said Nicholas, when the old man drew near.
	"That's it. Come on!... I was sure of it," began "Uncle." (He was distant relative of the Rostovs', a man of small means, and theireighbor.) "I knew you wouldn't be able to resist it and it's a goodhing you're going. That's it! Come on! (This was "Uncle's" favoritexpression.) "Take the covert at once, for my Girchik says the Ilaginsre at Korniki with their hounds. That's it. Come on!... They'llake the cubs from under your very nose."
	"That's where I'm going. Shall we join up our packs?" askedicholas.
	The hounds were joined into one pack, and "Uncle" and Nicholasode on side by side. Natasha, muffled up in shawls which did not hideer eager face and shining eyes, galloped up to them. She was followedy Petya who always kept close to her, by Michael, a huntsman, andy a groom appointed to look after her. Petya, who was laughing,hipped and pulled at his horse. Natasha sat easily and confidently oner black Arabchik and reined him in without effort with a firm hand.
	"Uncle" looked round disapprovingly at Petya and Natasha. He did notike to combine frivolity with the serious business of hunting.
	"Good morning, Uncle! We are going too!" shouted Petya.
	"Good morning, good morning! But don't go overriding the hounds,"aid "Uncle" sternly.
	"Nicholas, what a fine dog Trunila is! He knew me," said Natasha,eferring to her favorite hound.
	"In the first place, Trunila is not a 'dog,' but a harrier," thoughticholas, and looked sternly at his sister, trying to make her feelhe distance that ought to separate them at that moment. Natashanderstood it.
	"You mustn't think we'll be in anyone's way, Uncle," she said.We'll go to our places and won't budge."
	"A good thing too, little countess," said "Uncle," "only mind youon't fall off your horse," he added, "because- that's it, come on!-ou've nothing to hold on to."
	The oasis of the Otradnoe covert came in sight a few hundred yardsff, the huntsmen were already nearing it. Rostov, having finallyettled with "Uncle" where they should set on the hounds, and havinghown Natasha where she was to stand- a spot where nothing couldossibly run out- went round above the ravine.
	"Well, nephew, you're going for a big wolf," said "Uncle." "Mind andon't let her slip!"
	"That's as may happen," answered Rostov. "Karay, here!" hehouted, answering "Uncle's" remark by this call to his borzoi.aray was a shaggy old dog with a hanging jowl, famous for havingackled a big wolf unaided. They all took up their places.
	The old count, knowing his son's ardor in the hunt, hurried so asot to be late, and the hunstmen had not yet reached their places whenount Ilya Rostov, cheerful, flushed, and with quivering cheeks, drovep with his black horses over the winter rye to the place reserved forim, where a wolf might come out. Having straightened his coat andastened on his hunting knives and horn, he mounted his good, sleek,ell-fed, and comfortable horse, Viflyanka, which was turning gray,ike himself. His horses and trap were sent home. Count Ilya Rostov,hough not at heart a keen sportsman, knew the rules of the hunt well,nd rode to the bushy edge of the road where he was to stand, arrangedis reins, settled himself in the saddle, and, feeling that he waseady, looked about with a smile.
	Beside him was Simon Chekmar, his personal attendant, an oldorseman now somewhat stiff in the saddle. Chekmar held in leash threeormidable wolfhounds, who had, however, grown fat like their masternd his horse. Two wise old dogs lay down unleashed. Some hundredaces farther along the edge of the wood stood Mitka, the count'sther groom, a daring horseman and keen rider to hounds. Before theunt, by old custom, the count had drunk a silver cupful of mulledrandy, taken a snack, and washed it down with half a bottle of hisavorite Bordeaux.
	He was somewhat flushed with the wine and the drive. His eyes wereather moist and glittered more than usual, and as he sat in hisaddle, wrapped up in his fur coat, he looked like a child taken outor an outing.
	The thin, hollow-cheeked Chekmar, having got everything ready,ept glancing at his master with whom he had lived on the best oferms for thirty years, and understanding the mood he was inxpected a pleasant chat. A third person rode up circumspectly throughhe wood (it was plain that he had had a lesson) and stopped behindhe count. This person was a gray-bearded old man in a woman'sloak, with a tall peaked cap on his head. He was the buffoon, whoent by a woman's name, Nastasya Ivanovna.
	"Well, Nastasya Ivanovna!" whispered the count, winking at him.If you scare away the beast, Daniel'll give it you!"
	"I know a thing or two myself!" said Nastasya Ivanovna.
	"Hush!" whispered the count and turned to Simon. "Have you seenhe young countess?" he asked. "Where is she?"
	"With young Count Peter, by the Zharov rank grass," answeredimon, smiling. "Though she's a lady, she's very fond of hunting."
	"And you're surprised at the way she rides, Simon, eh?" said theount. "She's as good as many a man!"
	"Of course! It's marvelous. So bold, so easy!"
	"And Nicholas? Where is he? By the Lyadov upland, isn't he?"
	"Yes, sir. He knows where to stand. He understands the matter soell that Daniel and I are often quite astounded," said Simon, wellnowing what would please his master.
	"Rides well, eh? And how well he looks on his horse, eh?"
	"A perfect picture! How he chased a fox out of the rank grass by theavarzinsk thicket the other day! Leaped a fearful place; what a sighthen they rushed from the covert... the horse worth a thousandubles and the rider beyond all price! Yes, one would have to searchar to find another as smart."
	"To search far..." repeated the count, evidently sorry Simon had notaid more. "To search far," he said, turning back the skirt of hisoat to get at his snuffbox.
	"The other day when he came out from Mass in full uniform, Michaelidorych..." Simon did not finish, for on the still air he hadistinctly caught the music of the hunt with only two or threeounds giving tongue. He bent down his head and listened, shaking aarning finger at his master. "They are on the scent of the cubs... he whispered, "straight to the Lyadov uplands."
	The count, forgetting to smooth out the smile on his face, lookednto the distance straight before him, down the narrow open space,olding the snuffbox in his hand but not taking any. After the cryf the hounds came the deep tones of the wolf call from Daniel'sunting horn; the pack joined the first three hounds and they could beeard in full cry, with that peculiar lift in the note thatndicates that they are after a wolf. The whippers-in no longer set onhe hounds, but changed to the cry of ulyulyu, and above the othersose Daniel's voice, now a deep bass, now piercingly shrill. His voiceeemed to fill the whole wood and carried far beyond out into the openield.
	After listening a few moments in silence, the count and histtendant convinced themselves that the hounds had separated intowo packs: the sound of the larger pack, eagerly giving tongue,egan to die away in the distance, the other pack rushed by the woodast the count, and it was with this that Daniel's voice was heardalling ulyulyu. The sounds of both packs mingled and broke apartgain, but both were becoming more distant.
	Simon sighed and stooped to straighten the leash a young borzoiad entangled; the count too sighed and, noticing the snuffbox inis hand, opened it and took a pinch. "Back!" cried Simon to aorzoi that was pushing forward out of the wood. The count started andropped the snuffbox. Nastasya Ivanovna dismounted to pick it up.he count and Simon were looking at him.
	Then, unexpectedly, as often happens, the sound of the hunt suddenlypproached, as if the hounds in full cry and Daniel ulyulyuing wereust in front of them.
	The count turned and saw on his right Mitka staring at him with eyestarting out of his head, raising his cap and pointing before him tohe other side.
	"Look out!" he shouted, in a voice plainly showing that he hadong fretted to utter that word, and letting the borzois slip healloped toward the count.
	The count and Simon galloped out of the wood and saw on their left aolf which, softly swaying from side to side, was coming at a quietope farther to the left to the very place where they were standing.he angry borzois whined and getting free of the leash rushed past theorses' feet at the wolf.
	The wolf paused, turned its heavy forehead toward the dogswkwardly, like a man suffering from the quinsy, and, still slightlywaying from side to side, gave a couple of leaps and with a swishf its tail disappeared into the skirt of the wood. At the samenstant, with a cry like a wail, first one hound, then another, andhen another, sprang helter-skelter from the wood opposite and thehole pack rushed across the field toward the very spot where the wolfad disappeared. The hazel bushes parted behind the hounds andaniel's chestnut horse appeared, dark with sweat. On its long backat Daniel, hunched forward, capless, his disheveled gray hair hangingver his flushed, perspiring face.
	"Ulyulyulyu! ulyulyu!..." he cried. When he caught sight of theount his eyes flashed lightning.
	"Blast you!" he shouted, holding up his whip threateningly at theount.
	"You've let the wolf go!... What sportsmen! and as if scorning toay more to the frightened and shamefaced count, he lashed the heavinglanks of his sweating chestnut gelding with all the anger the countad aroused and flew off after the hounds. The count, like aunished schoolboy, looked round, trying by a smile to win Simon'sympathy for his plight. But Simon was no longer there. He wasalloping round by the bushes while the field was coming up on bothides, all trying to head the wolf, but it vanished into the woodefore they could do so.BK7|CH5
	CHAPTER V
	Nicholas Rostov meanwhile remained at his post, waiting for theolf. By the way the hunt approached and receded, by the cries ofhe dogs whose notes were familiar to him, by the way the voices ofhe huntsmen approached, receded, and rose, he realized what wasappening at the copse. He knew that young and old wolves werehere, that the hounds had separated into two packs, that somewhere wolf was being chased, and that something had gone wrong. Hexpected the wolf to come his way any moment. He made thousands ofifferent conjectures as to where and from what side the beast wouldome and how he would set upon it. Hope alternated with despair.everal times he addressed a prayer to God that the wolf should comeis way. He prayed with that passionate and shame-faced feeling withhich men pray at moments of great excitement arising from trivialauses. "What would it be to Thee to do this for me?" he said tood. "I know Thou art great, and that it is a sin to ask this of Thee,ut for God's sake do let the old wolf come my way and let Karaypring at it- in sight of 'Uncle' who is watching from over there- andeize it by the throat in a death grip!" A thousand times duringhat half-hour Rostov cast eager and restless glances over the edge ofhe wood, with the two scraggy oaks rising above the aspen undergrowthnd the gully with its water-worn side and "Uncle's" cap justisible above the bush on his right.
	"No, I shan't have such luck," thought Rostov, "yet what wouldn't ite worth! It is not to be! Everywhere, at cards and in war, I amlways unlucky." Memories of Austerlitz and of Dolokhov flashedapidly and clearly through his mind. "Only once in my life to getn old wolf, I want only that!" thought he, straining eyes and earsnd looking to the left and then to the right and listening to thelightest variation of note in the cries of the dogs.
	Again he looked to the right and saw something running toward himcross the deserted field. "No, it can't be!" thought Rostov, taking aeep breath, as a man does at the coming of something long hopedor. The height of happiness was reached- and so simply, withoutarning, or noise, or display, that Rostov could not believe hisyes and remained in doubt for over a second. The wolf ran forward andumped heavily over a gully that lay in her path. She was an oldnimal with a gray back and big reddish belly. She ran withouturry, evidently feeling sure that no one saw her. Rostov, holding hisreath, looked round at the borzois. They stood or lay not seeinghe wolf or understanding the situation. Old Karay had turned his headnd was angrily searching for fleas, baring his yellow teeth andnapping at his hind legs.
	"Ulyulyulyu!" whispered Rostov, pouting his lips. The borzois jumpedp, jerking the rings of the leashes and pricking their ears. Karayinished scratching his hindquarters and, cocking his ears, got upith quivering tail from which tufts of matted hair hung down.
	"Shall I loose them or not?" Nicholas asked himself as the wolfpproached him coming from the copse. Suddenly the wolf's wholehysiognomy changed: she shuddered, seeing what she had probably nevereen before- human eyes fixed upon her- and turning her head aittle toward Rostov, she paused.
	"Back or forward? Eh, no matter, forward..." the wolf seemed toay to herself, and she moved forward without again looking roundnd with a quiet, long, easy yet resolute lope.
	"Ulyulyu!" cried Nicholas, in a voice not his own, and of its ownccord his good horse darted headlong downhill, leaping over gullieso head off the wolf, and the borzois passed it, running faster still.icholas did not hear his own cry nor feel that he was galloping,or see the borzois, nor the ground over which he went: he saw onlyhe wolf, who, increasing her speed, bounded on in the sameirection along the hollow. The first to come into view was Milka,ith her black markings and powerful quarters, gaining upon theolf. Nearer and nearer... now she was ahead of it; but the wolfurned its head to face her, and instead of putting on speed as shesually did Milka suddenly raised her tail and stiffened her forelegs.
	"Ulyulyulyulyu!" shouted Nicholas.
	The reddish Lyubim rushed forward from behind Milka, sprangmpetuously at the wolf, and seized it by its hindquarters, butmmediately jumped aside in terror. The wolf crouched, gnashed hereeth, and again rose and bounded forward, followed at the distance of couple of feet by all the borzois, who did not get any closer toer.
	"She'll get away! No, it's impossible!" thought Nicholas, stillhouting with a hoarse voice.
	"Karay, ulyulyu!..." he shouted, looking round for the old borzoiho was now his only hope. Karay, with all the strength age had leftim, stretched himself to the utmost and, watching the wolf,alloped heavily aside to intercept it. But the quickness of theolf's lope and the borzoi's slower pace made it plain that Karayad miscalculated. Nicholas could already see not far in front ofim the wood where the wolf would certainly escape should she reacht. But, coming toward him, he saw hounds and a huntsman gallopinglmost straight at the wolf. There was still hope. A long, yellowishoung borzoi, one Nicholas did not know, from another leash, rushedmpetuously at the wolf from in front and almost knocked her over. Buthe wolf jumped up more quickly than anyone could have expected and,nashing her teeth, flew at the yellowish borzoi, which, with aiercing yelp, fell with its head on the ground, bleeding from aash in its side.
	"Karay? Old fellow!..." wailed Nicholas.
	Thanks to the delay caused by this crossing of the wolf's path,he old dog with its felted hair hanging from its thigh was withinive paces of it. As if aware of her danger, the wolf turned heryes on Karay, tucked her tail yet further between her legs, andncreased her speed. But here Nicholas only saw that somethingappened to Karay- the borzoi was suddenly on the wolf, and theyolled together down into a gully just in front of them.
	That instant, when Nicholas saw the wolf struggling in the gullyith the dogs, while from under them could be seen her gray hair andutstretched hind leg and her frightened choking head, with her earsaid back (Karay was pinning her by the throat), was the happiestoment of his life. With his hand on his saddlebow, he was ready toismount and stab the wolf, when she suddenly thrust her head uprom among that mass of dogs, and then her forepaws were on the edgef the gully. She clicked her teeth (Karay no longer had her by thehroat), leaped with a movement of her hind legs out of the gully, andaving disengaged herself from the dogs, with tail tucked in again,ent forward. Karay, his hair bristling, and probably bruised orounded, climbed with difficulty out of the gully.
	"Oh my God! Why?" Nicholas cried in despair.
	"Uncle's" huntsman was galloping from the other side across theolf's path and his borzois once more stopped the animal's advance.he was again hemmed in.
	Nicholas and his attendant, with "Uncle" and his huntsman, werell riding round the wolf, crying "ulyulyu!" shouting and preparing toismount each moment that the wolf crouched back, and starting forwardgain every time she shook herself and moved toward the wood where sheould be safe.
	Already, at the beginning of this chase, Daniel, hearing thelyulyuing, had rushed out from the wood. He saw Karay seize the wolf,nd checked his horse, supposing the affair to be over. But when heaw that the horsemen did not dismount and that the wolf shook herselfnd ran for safety, Daniel set his chestnut galloping, not at the wolfut straight toward the wood, just as Karay had run to cut thenimal off. As a result of this, he galloped up to the wolf justhen she had been stopped a second time by "Uncle's" borzois.
	Daniel galloped up silently, holding a naked dagger in his left handnd thrashing the laboring sides of his chestnut horse with his whips if it were a flail.
	Nicholas neither saw nor heard Daniel until the chestnut,reathing heavily, panted past him, and he heard the fall of a bodynd saw Daniel lying on the wolf's back among the dogs, trying toeize her by the ears. It was evident to the dogs, the hunters, and tohe wolf herself that all was now over. The terrified wolf pressedack her ears and tried to rise, but the borzois stuck to her.aniel rose a little, took a step, and with his whole weight, as ifying down to rest, fell on the wolf, seizing her by the ears.icholas was about to stab her, but Daniel whispered, "Don't! We'llag her!" and, changing his position, set his foot on the wolf's neck. stick was thrust between her jaws and she was fastened with a leash,s if bridled, her legs were bound together, and Daniel rolled herver once or twice from side to side.
	With happy, exhausted faces, they laid the old wolf, alive, on ahying and snorting horse and, accompanied by the dogs yelping at her,ook her to the place where they were all to meet. The hounds hadilled two of the cubs and the borzois three. The huntsmen assembledith their booty and their stories, and all came to look at theolf, which, with her broad-browed head hanging down and the bittentick between her jaws, gazed with great glassy eyes at this crowdf dogs and men surrounding her. When she was touched, she jerkeder bound legs and looked wildly yet simply at everybody. Old Countostov also rode up and touched the wolf.
	"Oh, what a formidable one!" said he. "A formidable one, eh?" hesked Daniel, who was standing near.
	"Yes, your excellency," answered Daniel, quickly doffing his cap.
	The count remembered the wolf he had let slip and his encounter withaniel.
	"Ah, but you are a crusty fellow, friend!" said the count.
	For sole reply Daniel gave him a shy, childlike, meek, and amiablemile.BK7|CH6
	CHAPTER VI
	The old count went home, and Natasha and Petya promised to returnery soon, but as it was still early the hunt went farther. Atidday they put the hounds into a ravine thickly overgrown withoung trees. Nicholas standing in a fallow field could see all hiships.
	Facing him lay a field of winter rye, there his own huntsman stoodlone in a hollow behind a hazel bush. The hounds had scarcely beenoosed before Nicholas heard one he knew, Voltorn, giving tongue atntervals; other hounds joined in, now pausing and now again givingongue. A moment later he heard a cry from the wooded ravine that aox had been found, and the whole pack, joining together, rushed alonghe ravine toward the ryefield and away from Nicholas.
	He saw the whips in their red caps galloping along the edge of theavine, he even saw the hounds, and was expecting a fox to show itselft any moment on the ryefield opposite.
	The huntsman standing in the hollow moved and loosed his borzois,nd Nicholas saw a queer, short-legged red fox with a fine brush goingard across the field. The borzois bore down on it.... Now they drewlose to the fox which began to dodge between the field in sharper andharper curves, trailing its brush, when suddenly a strange whiteorzoi dashed in followed by a black one, and everything was inonfusion; the borzois formed a star-shaped figure, scarcely swayingheir bodies and with tails turned away from the center of theroup. Two huntsmen galloped up to the dogs; one in a red cap, thether, a stranger, in a green coat.
	"What's this?" thought Nicholas. "Where's that huntsman from? Hes not 'Uncle's' man."
	The huntsmen got the fox, but stayed there a long time withouttrapping it to the saddle. Their horses, bridled and with highaddles, stood near them and there too the dogs were lying. Theuntsmen waved their arms and did something to the fox. Then from thatpot came the sound of a horn, with the signal agreed on in case of fight.
	"That's Ilagin's huntsman having a row with our Ivan," saidicholas' groom.
	Nicholas sent the man to call Natasha and Petya to him, and rodet a footpace to the place where the whips were getting the houndsogether. Several of the field galloped to the spot where the fightas going on.
	Nicholas dismounted, and with Natasha and Petya, who had riddenp, stopped near the hounds, waiting to see how the matter wouldnd. Out of the bushes came the huntsman who had been fighting andode toward his young master, with the fox tied to his crupper.hile still at a distance he took off his cap and tried to speakespectfully, but he was pale and breathless and his face was angry.ne of his eyes was black, but he probably was not even aware of it.
	"What has happened?" asked Nicholas.
	"A likely thing, killing a fox our dogs had hunted! And it was myray bitch that caught it! Go to law, indeed!... He snatches at theox! I gave him one with the fox. Here it is on my saddle! Do you want taste of this?..." said the huntsman, pointing to his dagger androbably imagining himself still speaking to his foe.
	Nicholas, not stopping to talk to the man, asked his sister andetya to wait for him and rode to the spot where the enemy's,lagin's, hunting party was.
	The victorious huntsman rode off to join the field, and there,urrounded by inquiring sympathizers, recounted his exploits.
	The facts were that Ilagin, with whom the Rostovs had a quarrelnd were at law, hunted over places that belonged by custom to theostovs, and had now, as if purposely, sent his men to the veryoods the Rostovs were hunting and let his man snatch a fox their dogsad chased.
	Nicholas, though he had never seen Ilagin, with his usual absence ofoderation in judgment, hated him cordially from reports of hisrbitrariness and violence, and regarded him as his bitterest foe.e rode in angry agitation toward him, firmly grasping his whip andully prepared to take the most resolute and desperate steps to punishis enemy.
	Hardly had he passed an angle of the wood before a stout gentlemann a beaver cap came riding toward him on a handsome raven-blackorse, accompanied by two hunt servants.
	Instead of an enemy, Nicholas found in Ilagin a stately andourteous gentleman who was particularly anxious to make the youngount's acquaintance. Having ridden up to Nicholas, Ilagin raisedis beaver cap and said he much regretted what had occurred andould have the man punished who had allowed himself to seize a foxunted by someone else's borzois. He hoped to become better acquaintedith the count and invited him to draw his covert.
	Natasha, afraid that her brother would do something dreadful, hadollowed him in some excitement. Seeing the enemies exchangingriendly greetings, she rode up to them. Ilagin lifted his beaverap still higher to Natasha and said, with a pleasant smile, thathe young countess resembled Diana in her passion for the chase asell as in her beauty, of which he had heard much.
	To expiate his huntsman's offense, Ilagin pressed the Rostovs toome to an upland of his about a mile away which he usually kept forimself and which, he said, swarmed with hares. Nicholas agreed, andhe hunt, now doubled, moved on.
	The way to Iligin's upland was across the fields. The huntervants fell into line. The masters rode together. "Uncle," Rostov,nd Ilagin kept stealthily glancing at one another's dogs, tryingot to be observed by their companions and searching uneasily forivals to their own borzois.
	Rostov was particularly struck by the beauty of a small,ure-bred, red-spotted bitch on Ilagin's leash, slender but withuscles like steel, a delicate muzzle, and prominent black eyes. Head heard of the swiftness of Ilagin's borzois, and in thateautiful bitch saw a rival to his own Milka.
	In the middle of a sober conversation begun by Ilagin about theear's harvest, Nicholas pointed to the red-spotted bitch.
	"A fine little bitch, that!" said he in a careless tone. "Is shewift?"
	"That one? Yes, she's a good dog, gets what she's after," answeredlagin indifferently, of the red-spotted bitch Erza, for which, a yearefore, he had given a neighbor three families of house serfs. "Son your parts, too, the harvest is nothing to boast of, Count?" heent on, continuing the conversation they had begun. And consideringt polite to return the young count's compliment, Ilagin looked at hisorzois and picked out Milka who attracted his attention by herreadth. "That black-spotted one of yours is fine- well shaped!"aid he.
	"Yes, she's fast enough," replied Nicholas, and thought: "If only full-grown hare would cross the field now I'd show you what sortf borzoi she is," and turning to his groom, he said he would give auble to anyone who found a hare.
	"I don't understand," continued Ilagin, "how some sportsmen can beo jealous about game and dogs. For myself, I can tell you, Count, Injoy riding in company such as this... what could be better?" (hegain raised his cap to Natasha) "but as for counting skins and whatne takes, I don't care about that."
	"Of course not!"
	"Or being upset because someone else's borzoi and not mine catchesomething. All I care about is to enjoy seeing the chase, is it noto, Count? For I consider that..."
	"A-tu!" came the long-drawn cry of one of the borzoi whippers-in,ho had halted. He stood on a knoll in the stubble, holding his whiploft, and again repeated his long-drawn cry, "A-tu!" (This call andhe uplifted whip meant that he saw a sitting hare.)
	"Ah, he has found one, I think," said Ilagin carelessly. "Yes, weust ride up.... Shall we both course it?" answered Nicholas, seeingn Erza and "Uncle's" red Rugay two rivals he had never yet had ahance of pitting against his own borzois. "And suppose they outdoy Milka at once!" he thought as he rode with "Uncle" and Ilaginoward the hare.
	"A full-grown one?" asked Ilagin as he approached the whip who hadighted the hare- and not without agitation he looked round andhistled to Erza.
	"And you, Michael Nikanorovich?" he said, addressing "Uncle."
	The latter was riding with a sullen expression on his face.
	"How can I join in? Why, you've given a village for each of yourorzois! That's it, come on! Yours are worth thousands. Try yoursgainst one another, you two, and I'll look on!"
	"Rugay, hey, hey!" he shouted. "Rugayushka!" he added, involuntarilyy this diminutive expressing his affection and the hopes he placed onhis red borzoi. Natasha saw and felt the agitation the two elderlyen and her brother were trying to conceal, and was herself excited byt.
	The huntsman stood halfway up the knoll holding up his whip andhe gentlefolk rode up to him at a footpace; the hounds that werear off on the horizon turned away from the hare, and the whips, butot the gentlefolk, also moved away. All were moving slowly andedately.
	"How is it pointing?" asked Nicholas, riding a hundred pacesoward the whip who had sighted the hare.
	But before the whip could reply, the hare, scenting the frost comingext morning, was unable to rest and leaped up. The pack on leashushed downhill in full cry after the hare, and from all sides theorzois that were not on leash darted after the hounds and the hare.ll the hunt, who had been moving slowly, shouted, "Stop!" callingn the hounds, while the borzoi whips, with a cry of "A-tu!"gallopedcross the field setting the borzois on the hare. The tranquil Ilagin,icholas, Natasha, and "Uncle" flew, reckless of where and how theyent, seeing only the borzois and the hare and fearing only to loseight even for an instant of the chase. The hare they had startedas a strong and swift one. When he jumped up he did not run atnce, but pricked his ears listening to the shouting and tramplinghat resounded from all sides at once. He took a dozen bounds, notery quickly, letting the borzois gain on him, and, finally havinghosen his direction and realized his danger, laid back his ears andushed off headlong. He had been lying in the stubble, but in front ofim was the autumn sowing where the ground was soft. The two borzoisf the huntsman who had sighted him, having been the nearest, were theirst to see and pursue him, but they had not gone far before Ilagin'sed-spotted Erza passed them, got within a length, flew at the hareith terrible swiftness aiming at his scut, and, thinking she hadeized him, rolled over like a ball. The hare arched his back andounded off yet more swiftly. From behind Erza rushed theroad-haunched, black-spotted Milka and began rapidly gaining on theare.
	"Milashka, dear!" rose Nicholas' triumphant cry. It looked as ifilka would immediately pounce on the hare, but she overtook him andlew past. The hare had squatted. Again the beautiful Erza reachedim, but when close to the hare's scut paused as if measuring theistance, so as not to make a mistake this time but seize his hindeg.
	"Erza, darling! Ilagin wailed in a voice unlike his own. Erza didot hearken to his appeal. At the very moment when she would haveeized her prey, the hare moved and darted along the balk betweenhe winter rye and the stubble. Again Erza and Milka were abreast,unning like a pair of carriage horses, and began to overtake theare, but it was easier for the hare to run on the balk and theorzois did not overtake him so quickly.
	"Rugay, Rugayushka! That's it, come on!" came a third voice justhen, and "Uncle's" red borzoi, straining and curving its back, caughtp with the two foremost borzois, pushed ahead of them regardless ofhe terrible strain, put on speed close to the hare, knocked it offhe balk onto the ryefield, again put on speed still more viciously,inking to his knees in the muddy field, and all one could see wasow, muddying his back, he rolled over with the hare. A ring oforzois surrounded him. A moment later everyone had drawn up round therowd of dogs. Only the delighted "Uncle" dismounted, and cut off aad, shaking the hare for the blood to drip off, and anxiouslylancing round with restless eyes while his arms and legs twitched. Hepoke without himself knowing whom to or what about. "That's it,ome on! That's a dog!... There, it has beaten them all, thehousand-ruble as well as the one-ruble borzois. That's it, comen!" said he, panting and looking wrathfully around as if he werebusing someone, as if they were all his enemies and had insulted him,nd only now had he at last succeeded in justifying himself. "Therere your thousand-ruble ones.... That's it, come on!..."
	"Rugay, here's a pad for you!" he said, throwing down the hare'suddy pad. "You've deserved it, that's it, come on!"
	"She'd tired herself out, she'd run it down three times by herself,"aid Nicholas, also not listening to anyone and regardless ofhether he were heard or not.
	"But what is there in running across it like that?" said Ilagin'sroom.
	"Once she had missed it and turned it away, any mongrel could taket," Ilagin was saying at the same time, breathless from his gallopnd his excitement. At the same moment Natasha, without drawingreath, screamed joyously, ecstatically, and so piercingly that it setveryone's ear tingling. By that shriek she expressed what thethers expressed by all talking at once, and it was so strange thathe must herself have been ashamed of so wild a cry and everyonelse would have been amazed at it at any other time. "Uncle" himselfwisted up the hare, threw it neatly and smartly across his horse'sack as if by that gesture he meant to rebuke everybody, and, withn air of not wishing to speak to anyone, mounted his bay and rodeff. The others all followed, dispirited and shamefaced, and only muchater were they able to regain their former affectation ofndifference. For a long time they continued to look at red Rugay who,is arched back spattered with mud and clanking the ring of his leash,alked along just behind "Uncle's" horse with the serene air of aonqueror.
	"Well, I am like any other dog as long as it's not a question ofoursing. But when it is, then look out!" his appearance seem toicholas to be saying.
	When, much later, "Uncle" rode up to Nicholas and began talking toim, he felt flattered that, after what had happened, "Uncle"eigned to speak to him.BK7|CH7
	CHAPTER VII
	Toward evening Ilagin took leave of Nicholas, who found that theyere so far from home that he accepted "Uncle's" offer that theunting party should spend the night in his little village ofikhaylovna.
	"And if you put up at my house that will be better still. That's it,ome on!" said "Uncle." "You see it's damp weather, and you couldest, and the little countess could be driven home in a trap."
	"Uncle's" offer was accepted. A huntsman was sent to Otradnoe for trap, while Nicholas rode with Natasha and Petya to "Uncle's" house.
	Some five male domestic serfs, big and little, rushed out to theront porch to meet their master. A score of women serfs, old andoung, as well as children, popped out from the back entrance toave a look at the hunters who were arriving. The presence of Natasha- woman, a lady, and on horseback- raised the curiosity of the serfso such a degree that many of them came up to her, stared her in theace, and unabashed by her presence made remarks about her as thoughhe were some prodigy on show and not a human being able to hear ornderstand what was said about her.
	"Arinka! Look, she sits sideways! There she sits and her skirtangles.... See, she's got a little hunting horn!"
	"Goodness gracious! See her knife?..."
	"Isn't she a Tartar!"
	"How is it you didn't go head over heels?" asked the boldest of all,ddressing Natasha directly.
	"Uncle" dismounted at the porch of his little wooden house whichtood in the midst of an overgrown garden and, after a glance at hisetainers, shouted authoritatively that the superfluous ones shouldake themselves off and that all necessary preparations should be madeo receive the guests and the visitors.
	The serfs all dispersed. "Uncle" lifted Natasha off her horse andaking her hand led her up the rickety wooden steps of the porch.he house, with its bare, unplastered log walls, was not overclean- itid not seem that those living in it aimed at keeping it spotless- buteither was it noticeably neglected. In the entry there was a smell ofresh apples, and wolf and fox skins hung about.
	"Uncle" led the visitors through the anteroom into a small hall with folding table and red chairs, then into the drawing room with aound birchwood table and a sofa, and finally into his private roomhere there was a tattered sofa, a worn carpet, and portraits ofuvorov, of the host's father and mother, and of himself in militaryniform. The study smelt strongly of tobacco and dogs. "Uncle" askedis visitors to sit down and make themselves at home, and then wentut of the room. Rugay, his back still muddy, came into the room anday down on the sofa, cleaning himself with his tongue and teeth.eading from the study was a passage in which a partition withagged curtains could be seen. From behind this came women'saughter and whispers. Natasha, Nicholas, and Petya took off theirraps and sat down on the sofa. Petya, leaning on his elbow, fellsleep at once. Natasha and Nicholas were silent. Their faceslowed, they were hungry and very cheerful. They looked at one anothernow that the hunt was over and they were in the house, Nicholas noonger considered it necessary to show his manly superiority overis sister), Natasha gave him a wink, and neither refrained longrom bursting into a peal of ringing laughter even before they had aretext ready to account for it.
	After a while "Uncle" came in, in a Cossack coat, blue trousers, andmall top boots. And Natasha felt that this costume, the very onehe had regarded with surprise and amusement at Otradnoe, was just theight thing and not at all worse than a swallow-tail or frock coat.Uncle" too was in high spirits and far from being offended by therother's and sister's laughter (it could never enter his head thathey might be laughing at his way of life) he himself joined in theerriment.
	"That's right, young countess, that's it, come on! I never sawnyone like her!" said he, offering Nicholas a pipe with a long stemnd, with a practiced motion of three fingers, taking down anotherhat had been cut short. "She's ridden all day like a man, and is asresh as ever!
	Soon after "Uncle's" reappearance the door was opened, evidentlyrom the sound by a barefooted girl, and a stout, rosy, good-lookingoman of about forty, with a double chin and full red lips, enteredarrying a large loaded tray. With hospitable dignity and cordialityn her glance and in every motion, she looked at the visitors and,ith a pleasant smile, bowed respectfully. In spite of her exceptionaltoutness, which caused her to protrude her chest and stomach andhrow back her head, this woman (who was "Uncle's" housekeeper) trodery lightly. She went to the table, set down the tray, and with herlump white hands deftly took from it the bottles and various hors'oeuvres and dishes and arranged them on the table. When she hadinished, she stepped aside and stopped at the door with a smile oner face. "Here I am. I am she! Now do you understand 'Uncle'?" herxpression said to Rostov. How could one help understanding? Notnly Nicholas, but even Natasha understood the meaning of his puckeredrow and the happy complacent smile that slightly puckered his lipshen Anisya Fedorovna entered. On the tray was a bottle of herbine, different kinds of vodka, pickled mushrooms, rye cakes made withuttermilk, honey in the comb, still mead and sparkling mead,pples, nuts (raw and roasted), and nut-and-honey sweets. Afterwardshe brought a freshly roasted chicken, ham, preserves made with honey,nd preserves made with sugar.
	All this was the fruit of Anisya Fedorovna's housekeeping,athered and prepared by her. The smell and taste of it all had amack of Anisya Fedorovna herself: a savor of juiciness,leanliness, whiteness, and pleasant smiles.
	"Take this, little Lady-Countess!" she kept saying, as she offeredatasha first one thing and then another.
	Natasha ate of everything and thought she had never seen or eatenuch buttermilk cakes, such aromatic jam, such honey-and-nut sweets,r such a chicken anywhere. Anisya Fedorovna left the room.
	After supper, over their cherry brandy, Rostov and "Uncle" talked ofast and future hunts, of Rugay and Ilagin's dogs, while Natasha satpright on the sofa and listened with sparkling eyes. She triedeveral times to wake Petya that he might eat something, but he onlyuttered incoherent words without waking up. Natasha felt soighthearted and happy in these novel surroundings that she onlyeared the trap would come for her too soon. After a casual pause,uch as often occurs when receiving friends for the first time inne's own house, "Uncle," answering a thought that was in hisisitors' mind, said:
	"This, you see, is how I am finishing my days... Death will come.hat's it, come on! Nothing will remain. Then why harm anyone?"
	"Uncle's" face was very significant and even handsome as he saidhis. Involuntarily Rostov recalled all the good he had heard aboutim from his father and the neighbors. Throughout the whole provinceUncle" had the reputation of being the most honorable andisinterested of cranks. They called him in to decide family disputes,hose him as executor, confided secrets to him, elected him to be austice and to other posts; but he always persistently refusedublic appointments, passing the autumn and spring in the fields onis bay gelding, sitting at home in winter, and lying in his overgrownarden in summer.
	"Why don't you enter the service, Uncle?"
	"I did once, but gave it up. I am not fit for it. That's it, comen! I can't make head or tail of it. That's for you- I haven'trains enough. Now, hunting is another matter- that's it, come on!pen the door, there!" he shouted. "Why have you shut it?"
	The door at the end of the passage led to the huntsmen's room, ashey called the room for the hunt servants.
	There was a rapid patter of bare feet, and an unseen hand opened theoor into the huntsmen's room, from which came the clear sounds of aalalayka on which someone, who was evidently a master of the art, waslaying. Natasha had been listening to those strains for some time andow went out into the passage to hear better.
	"That's Mitka, my coachman.... I have got him a good balalayka.'m fond of it," said "Uncle."
	It was the custom for Mitka to play the balalayka in theuntsmen's room when "Uncle" returned from the chase. "Uncle" was fondf such music.
	"How good! Really very good!" said Nicholas with somenintentional superciliousness, as if ashamed to confess that theounds pleased him very much.
	"Very good?" said Natasha reproachfully, noticing her brother'sone. "Not 'very good' it's simply delicious!"
	Just as "Uncle's" pickled mushrooms, honey, and cherry brandy hadeemed to her the best in the world, so also that song, at thatoment, seemed to her the acme of musical delight.
	"More, please, more!" cried Natasha at the door as soon as thealalayka ceased. Mitka tuned up afresh, and recommenced thrumming thealalayka to the air of My Lady, with trills and variations. "Uncle"at listening, slightly smiling, with his head on one side. The airas repeated a hundred times. The balalayka was retuned severalimes and the same notes were thrummed again, but the listeners didot grow weary of it and wished to hear it again and again. Anisyaedorovna came in and leaned her portly person against the doorpost.
	"You like listening?" she said to Natasha, with a smile extremelyike "Uncle's." "That's a good player of ours," she added.
	"He doesn't play that part right!" said "Uncle" suddenly, with annergetic gesture. "Here he ought to burst out- that's it, come on!-ught to burst out."
	"Do you play then?" asked Natasha.
	"Uncle" did not answer, but smiled.
	"Anisya, go and see if the strings of my guitar are all right. Iaven't touched it for a long time. That's it- come on! I've givent up."
	Anisya Fedorovna, with her light step, willingly went to fulfill herrrand and brought back the guitar.
	Without looking at anyone, "Uncle" blew the dust off it and, tappinghe case with his bony fingers, tuned the guitar and settled himselfn his armchair. He took the guitar a little above the fingerboard,rching his left elbow with a somewhat theatrical gesture, and, with aink at Anisya Fedorovna, struck a single chord, pure and sonorous,nd then quietly, smoothly, and confidently began playing in very slowime, not My Lady, but the well-known song: Came a maiden down thetreet. The tune, played with precision and in exact time, began tohrill in the hearts of Nicholas and Natasha, arousing in them theame kind of sober mirth as radiated from Anisya Fedorovna's wholeeing. Anisya Fedorovna flushed, and drawing her kerchief over herace went laughing out of the room. "Uncle" continued to playorrectly, carefully, with energetic firmness, looking with ahanged and inspired expression at the spot where Anisya Fedorovna hadust stood. Something seemed to be laughing a little on one side ofis face under his gray mustaches, especially as the song grew briskernd the time quicker and when, here and there, as he ran his fingersver the strings, something seemed to snap.
	"Lovely, lovely! Go on, Uncle, go on!" shouted Natasha as soon as head finished. She jumped up and hugged and kissed him. "Nicholas,icholas!" she said, turning to her brother, as if asking him: "Whats it moves me so?"
	Nicholas too was greatly pleased by "Uncle's" playing, and "Uncle"layed the piece over again. Anisya Fedorovna's smiling faceeappeared in the doorway and behind hers other faces...
	    Fetching water clear and sweet,
	    Stop, dear maiden, I entreat-layed "Uncle" once more, running his fingers skillfully over thetrings, and then he stopped short and jerked his shoulders.
	"Go on, Uncle dear," Natasha wailed in an imploring tone as if herife depended on it.
	"Uncle" rose, and it was as if there were two men in him: one ofhem smiled seriously at the merry fellow, while the merry fellowtruck a naive and precise attitude preparatory to a folk dance.
	"Now then, niece!" he exclaimed, waving to Natasha the hand that hadust struck a chord.
	Natasha threw off the shawl from her shoulders, ran forward toace "Uncle," and setting her arms akimbo also made a motion wither shoulders and struck an attitude.
	Where, how, and when had this young countess, educated by an emigreerench governess, imbibed from the Russian air she breathed thatpirit and obtained that manner which the pas de chale* would, oneould have supposed, long ago have effaced? But the spirit and theovements were those inimitable and unteachable Russian ones thatUncle" had expected of her. As soon as she had struck her pose, andmiled triumphantly, proudly, and with sly merriment, the fear thatad at first seized Nicholas and the others that she might not dohe right thing was at an end, and they were already admiring her.
	*The French shawl dance.
	She did the right thing with such precision, such completerecision, that Anisya Fedorovna, who had at once handed her theandkerchief she needed for the dance, had tears in her eyes, thoughhe laughed as she watched this slim, graceful countess, reared inilks and velvets and so different from herself, who yet was able tonderstand all that was in Anisya and in Anisya's father and mothernd aunt, and in every Russian man and woman.
	"Well, little countess; that's it- come on!" cried "Uncle," with aoyous laugh, having finished the dance. "Well done, niece! Now a fineoung fellow must be found as husband for you. That's it- come on!"
	"He's chosen already," said Nicholas smiling.
	"Oh?" said "Uncle" in surprise, looking inquiringly at Natasha,ho nodded her head with a happy smile.
	"And such a one!" she said. But as soon as she had said it a newrain of thoughts and feelings arose in her. "What did Nicholas' smileean when he said 'chosen already'? Is he glad of it or not? It iss if he thought my Bolkonski would not approve of or understand ouraiety. But he would understand it all. Where is he now?" she thought,nd her face suddenly became serious. But this lasted only a second.Don't dare to think about it," she said to herself, and sat downgain smilingly beside "Uncle," begging him to play something more.
	"Uncle" played another song and a valse; then after a pause heleared his throat and sang his favorite hunting song:
	    As 'twas growing dark last night
	    Fell the snow so soft and light...
	"Uncle" sang as peasants sing, with full and naive conviction thathe whole meaning of a song lies in the words and that the tuneomes of itself, and that apart from the words there is no tune, whichxists only to give measure to the words. As a result of this thenconsidered tune, like the song of a bird, was extraordinarilyood. Natasha was in ecstasies over "Uncle's" singing. She resolved toive up learning the harp and to play only the guitar. She askedUncle" for his guitar and at once found the chords of the song.
	After nine o'clock two traps and three mounted men, who had beenent to look for them, arrived to fetch Natasha and Petya. The countnd countess did not know where they were and were very anxious,aid one of the men.
	Petya was carried out like a log and laid in the larger of the tworaps. Natasha and Nicholas got into the other. "Uncle" wrappedatasha up warmly and took leave of her with quite a new tenderness.e accompanied them on foot as far as the bridge that could not berossed, so that they had to go round by the ford, and he sentuntsmen to ride in front with lanterns.
	"Good-by, dear niece," his voice called out of the darkness- not theoice Natasha had known previously, but the one that had sung As 'twasrowing dark last night.
	In the village through which they passed there were red lights and aheerful smell of smoke.
	"What a darling Uncle is!" said Natasha, when they had come out ontohe highroad.
	"Yes," returned Nicholas. "You're not cold?"
	"No. I'm quite, quite all right. I feel so comfortable!" answeredatasha, almost perplexed by her feelings. They remained silent a longhile. The night was dark and damp. They could not see the horses, butnly heard them splashing through the unseen mud.
	What was passing in that receptive childlike soul that so eagerlyaught and assimilated all the diverse impressions of life? How didhey all find place in her? But she was very happy. As they wereearing home she suddenly struck up the air of As 'twas growing darkast night- the tune of which she had all the way been trying to getnd had at last caught.
	"Got it?" said Nicholas.
	"What were you thinking about just now, Nicholas?" inquired Natasha.
	They were fond of asking one another that question.
	"I?" said Nicholas, trying to remember. "Well, you see, first Ihought that Rugay, the red hound, was like Uncle, and that if he were man he would always keep Uncle near him, if not for his riding, thenor his manner. What a good fellow Uncle is! Don't you think so?...ell, and you?"
	"I? Wait a bit, wait.... Yes, first I thought that we are drivinglong and imagining that we are going home, but that heaven knowshere we are really going in the darkness, and that we shall arrivend suddenly find that we are not in Otradnoe, but in Fairyland. Andhen I thought... No, nothing else."
	"I know, I expect you thought of him," said Nicholas, smiling asatasha knew by the sound of his voice.
	"No," said Natasha, though she had in reality been thinking aboutrince Andrew at the same time as of the rest, and of how he wouldave liked "Uncle." "And then I was saying to myself all the way, 'Howell Anisya carried herself, how well!'" And Nicholas heard herpontaneous, happy, ringing laughter. "And do you know," sheuddenly said, "I know that I shall never again be as happy andranquil as I am now."
	"Rubbish, nonsense, humbug!" exclaimed Nicholas, and he thought:How charming this Natasha of mine is! I have no other friend like hernd never shall have. Why should she marry? We might always drivebout together!
	"What a darling this Nicholas of mine is!" thought Natasha.
	"Ah, there are still lights in the drawingroom!" she said,ointing to the windows of the house that gleamed invitingly in theoist velvety darkness of the night.BK7|CH8
	CHAPTER VIII
	Count Ilya Rostov had resigned the position of Marshal of theobility because it involved him in too much expense, but still hisffairs did not improve. Natasha and Nicholas often noticed theirarents conferring together anxiously and privately and hearduggestions of selling the fine ancestral Rostov house and estate nearoscow. It was not necessary to entertain so freely as when theount had been Marshal, and life at Otradnoe was quieter than inormer years, but still the enormous house and its lodges were full ofeople and more than twenty sat down to table every day. These werell their own people who had settled down in the house almost asembers of the family, or persons who were, it seemed, obliged to liven the count's house. Such were Dimmler the musician and his wife,ogel the dancing master and his family, Belova, an old maiden lady,n inmate of the house, and many others such as Petya's tutors, theirls' former governess, and other people who simply found itreferable and more advantageous to live in the count's house thant home. They had not as many visitors as before, but the old habitsf life without which the count and countess could not conceive ofxistence remained unchanged. There was still the huntingstablishment which Nicholas had even enlarged, the same fiftyorses and fifteen grooms in the stables, the same expensiveresents and dinner parties to the whole district on name days;here were still the count's games of whist and boston, at which-preading out his cards so that everybody could see them- he letimself be plundered of hundreds of rubles every day by his neighbors,ho looked upon an opportunity to play a rubber with Count Rostov as aost profitable source of income.
	The count moved in his affairs as in a huge net, trying not toelieve that he was entangled but becoming more and more so at everytep, and feeling too feeble to break the meshes or to set to workarefully and patiently to disentangle them. The countess, with heroving heart, felt that her children were being ruined, that it wasot the count's fault for he could not help being what he was- thatthough he tried to hide it) he himself suffered from theonsciousness of his own and his children's ruin, and she tried toind means of remedying the position. From her feminine point ofiew she could see only one solution, namely, for Nicholas to marry rich heiress. She felt this to be their last hope and that ificholas refused the match she had found for him, she would have tobandon the hope of ever getting matters right. This match was withulie Karagina, the daughter of excellent and virtuous parents, a girlhe Rostovs had known from childhood, and who had now become a wealthyeiress through the death of the last of her brothers.
	The countess had written direct to Julie's mother in Moscowuggesting a marriage between their children and had received aavorable answer from her. Karagina had replied that for her parthe was agreeable, and everything depend on her daughter'snclination. She invited Nicholas to come to Moscow.
	Several times the countess, with tears in her eyes, told her sonhat now both her daughters were settled, her only wish was to see himarried. She said she could lie down in her grave peacefully if thatere accomplished. Then she told him that she knew of a splendidirl and tried to discover what he thought about marriage.
	At other times she praised Julie to him and advised him to go tooscow during the holidays to amuse himself. Nicholas guessed what hisother's remarks were leading to and during one of these conversationsnduced her to speak quite frankly. She told him that her only hope ofetting their affairs disentangled now lay in his marrying Juliearagina.
	"But, Mamma, suppose I loved a girl who has no fortune, would youxpect me to sacrifice my feelings and my honor for the sake ofoney?" he asked his mother, not realizing the cruelty of his questionnd only wishing to show his noble-mindedness.
	"No, you have not understood me," said his mother, not knowing howo justify herself. "You have not understood me, Nikolenka. It is yourappiness I wish for," she added, feeling that she was telling anntruth and was becoming entangled. She began to cry.
	"Mamma, don't cry! Only tell me that you wish it, and you know Iill give my life, anything, to put you at ease," said Nicholas. "Iould sacrifice anything for you- even my feelings."
	But the countess did not want the question put like that: she didot want a sacrifice from her son, she herself wished to make aacrifice for him.
	"No, you have not understood me, don't let us talk about it," sheeplied, wiping away her tears.
	"Maybe I do love a poor girl," said Nicholas to himself. "Am I toacrifice my feelings and my honor for money? I wonder how Mamma couldpeak so to me. Because Sonya is poor I must not love her," hehought, "must not respond to her faithful, devoted love? Yet I shouldertainly be happier with her than with some doll-like Julie. I canlways sacrifice my feelings for my family's welfare," he said toimself, "but I can't coerce my feelings. If I love Sonya, thateeling is for me stronger and higher than all else."
	Nicholas did not go to Moscow, and the countess did not renew theonversation with him about marriage. She saw with sorrow, andometimes with exasperation, symptoms of a growing attachmentetween her son and the portionless Sonya. Though she blamed herselfor it, she could not refrain from grumbling at and worrying Sonya,ften pulling her up without reason, addressing her stiffly as "myear," and using the formal "you" instead of the intimate "thou" inpeaking to her. The kindhearted countess was the more vexed withonya because that poor, dark-eyed niece of hers was so meek, so kind,o devotedly grateful to her benefactors, and so faithfully,nchangingly, and unselfishly in love with Nicholas, that there wereo grounds for finding fault with her.
	Nicholas was spending the last of his leave at home. A fourth letterad come from Prince Andrew, from Rome, in which he wrote that heould have been on his way back to Russia long ago had not his woundnexpectedly reopened in the warm climate, which obliged him toefer his return till the beginning of the new year. Natasha was stills much in love with her betrothed, found the same comfort in thatove, and was still as ready to throw herself into all the pleasuresf life as before; but at the end of the fourth month of theireparation she began to have fits of depression which she could notaster. She felt sorry for herself: sorry that she was being wastedll this time and of no use to anyone- while she felt herself soapable of loving and being loved.
	Things were not cheerful in the Rostovs' home.BK7|CH9
	CHAPTER IX
	Christmas came and except for the ceremonial Mass, the solemn andearisome Christmas congratulations from neighbors and servants, andhe new dresses everyone put on, there were no special festivities,hough the calm frost of twenty degrees Reaumur, the dazzling sunshiney day, and the starlight of the winter nights seemed to call for somepecial celebration of the season.
	On the third day of Christmas week, after the midday dinner, all thenmates of the house dispersed to various rooms. It was the dullestime of the day. Nicholas, who had been visiting some neighbors thatorning, was asleep on the sitting-room sofa. The old count wasesting in his study. Sonya sat in the drawing room at the roundable, copying a design for embroidery. The countess was playingatience. Nastasya Ivanovna the buffoon sat with a sad face at theindow with two old ladies. Natasha came into the room, went up toonya, glanced at what she was doing, and then went up to her mothernd stood without speaking.
	"Why are you wandering about like an outcast?" asked her mother.What do you want?"
	"Him... I want him... now, this minute! I want him!" said Natasha,ith glittering eyes and no sign of a smile.
	The countess lifted her head and looked attentively at her daughter.
	"Don't look at me, Mamma! Don't look; I shall cry directly."
	"Sit down with me a little," said the countess.
	"Mamma, I want him. Why should I be wasted like this, Mamma?"
	Her voice broke, tears gushed from her eyes, and she turneduickly to hide them and left the room.
	She passed into the sitting room, stood there thinking awhile, andhen went into the maids' room. There an old maidservant was grumblingt a young girl who stood panting, having just run in through the coldrom the serfs' quarters.
	"Stop playing- there's a time for everything," said the old woman.
	"Let her alone, Kondratevna," said Natasha. "Go, Mavrushka, go."
	Having released Mavrushka, Natasha crossed the dancing hall and wento the vestibule. There an old footman and two young ones were playingards. They broke off and rose as she entered.
	"What can I do with them?" thought Natasha.
	"Oh, Nikita, please go... where can I send him?... Yes, go to theard and fetch a fowl, please, a cock, and you, Misha, bring me someats."
	"Just a few oats?" said Misha, cheerfully and readily.
	"Go, go quickly," the old man urged him.
	"And you, Theodore, get me a piece of chalk."
	On her way past the butler's pantry she told them to set aamovar, though it was not at all the time for tea.
	Foka, the butler, was the most ill-tempered person in the house.atasha liked to test her power over him. He distrusted the ordernd asked whether the samovar was really wanted.
	"Oh dear, what a young lady!" said Foka, pretending to frown atatasha.
	No one in the house sent people about or gave them as much troubles Natasha did. She could not see people unconcernedly, but had toend them on some errand. She seemed to be trying whether any ofhem would get angry or sulky with her; but the serfs fulfilled none's orders so readily as they did hers. "What can I do, where can go?" thought she, as she went slowly along the passage.
	"Nastasya Ivanovna, what sort of children shall I have?" she askedhe buffoon, who was coming toward her in a woman's jacket.
	"Why, fleas, crickets, grasshoppers," answered the buffoon.
	"O Lord, O Lord, it's always the same! Oh, where am I to go? What am to do with myself?" And tapping with her heels, she ran quicklypstairs to see Vogel and his wife who lived on the upper story.
	Two governesses were sitting with the Vogels at a table, on whichere plates of raisins, walnuts, and almonds. The governesses wereiscussing whether it was cheaper to live in Moscow or Odessa. Natashaat down, listened to their talk with a serious and thoughtful air,nd then got up again.
	"The island of Madagascar," she said, "Ma-da-gas-car," she repeated,rticulating each syllable distinctly, and, not replying to Madamechoss who asked her what she was saying, she went out of the room.
	Her brother Petya was upstairs too; with the man in attendance onim he was preparing fireworks to let off that night.
	"Petya! Petya!" she called to him. "Carry me downstairs."
	Petya ran up and offered her his back. She jumped on it, putting herrms round his neck, and he pranced along with her.
	"No, don't... the island of Madagascar!" she said, and jumping offis back she went downstairs.
	Having as it were reviewed her kingdom, tested her power, and madeure that everyone was submissive, but that all the same it wasull, Natasha betook herself to the ballroom, picked up her guitar,at down in a dark corner behind a bookcase, and began to run heringers over the strings in the bass, picking out a passage sheecalled from an opera she had heard in Petersburg with Prince Andrew.hat she drew from the guitar would have had no meaning for otheristeners, but in her imagination a whole series of reminiscencesrose from those sounds. She sat behind the bookcase with her eyesixed on a streak of light escaping from the pantry door andistened to herself and pondered. She was in a mood for brooding onhe past.
	Sonya passed to the pantry with a glass in her hand. Natasha glancedt her and at the crack in the pantry door, and it seemed to herhat she remembered the light failing through that crack once beforend Sonya passing with a glass in her hand. "Yes it was exactly theame," thought Natasha.
	"Sonya, what is this?" she cried, twanging a thick string.
	"Oh, you are there!" said Sonya with a start, and came near andistened. "I don't know. A storm?" she ventured timidly, afraid ofeing wrong.
	"There! That's just how she started and just how she came up smilingimidly when all this happened before," thought Natasha, "and inust the same way I thought there was something lacking in her."
	"No, it's the chorus from The Water-Carrier, listen! " and Natashaang the air of the chorus so that Sonya should catch it. "Whereere you going?" she asked.
	"To change the water in this glass. I am just finishing the design."
	"You always find something to do, but I can't," said Natasha. "Andhere's Nicholas?"
	"Asleep, I think."
	"Sonya, go and wake him," said Natasha. "Tell him I want him to comend sing."
	She sat awhile, wondering what the meaning of it all having happenedefore could be, and without solving this problem, or at allegretting not having done so, she again passed in fancy to the timehen she was with him and he was looking at her with a lover's eyes.
	"Oh, if only he would come quicker! I am so afraid it will never be!nd, worst of all, I am growing old- that's the thing! There won'then be in me what there is now. But perhaps he'll come today, willome immediately. Perhaps he has come and is sitting in the drawingoom. Perhaps he came yesterday and I have forgotten it." She rose,ut down the guitar, and went to the drawing room.
	All the domestic circle, tutors, governesses, and guests, werelready at the tea table. The servants stood round the table- butrince Andrew was not there and life was going on as before.
	"Ah, here she is!" said the old count, when he saw Natasha enter.Well, sit down by me." But Natasha stayed by her mother and glancedound as if looking for something.
	"Mamma!" she muttered, "give him to me, give him, Mamma, quickly,uickly!" and she again had difficulty in repressing her sobs.
	She sat down at the table and listened to the conversation betweenhe elders and Nicholas, who had also come to the table. "My God, myod! The same faces, the same talk, Papa holding his cup and blowingn the same way!" thought Natasha, feeling with horror a sense ofepulsion rising up in her for the whole household, because theyere always the same.
	After tea, Nicholas, Sonya, and Natasha went to the sitting room, toheir favorite corner where their most intimate talks always began.BK7|CH10
	CHAPTER X
	Does it ever happen to you," said Natasha to her brother, whenhey settled down in the sitting room, "does it ever happen to youo feel as if there were nothing more to come- nothing; thatverything good is past? And to feel not exactly dull, but sad?"
	"I should think so!" he replied. "I have felt like that whenverything was all right and everyone was cheerful. The thought hasome into my mind that I was already tired of it all, and that we mustll die. Once in the regiment I had not gone to some merrymaking wherehere was music... and suddenly I felt so depressed..."
	"Oh yes, I know, I know, I know!" Natasha interrupted him. "When Ias quite little that used to be so with me. Do you remember when Ias punished once about some plums? You were all dancing, and I satobbing in the schoolroom? I shall never forget it: I felt sad andorry for everyone, for myself, and for everyone. And I wasnnocent- that was the chief thing," said Natasha. "Do you remember?"
	"I remember," answered Nicholas. "I remember that I came to youfterwards and wanted to comfort you, but do you know, I feltshamed to. We were terribly absurd. I had a funny doll then andanted to give it to you. Do you remember?"
	"And do you remember," Natasha asked with a pensive smile, "hownce, long, long ago, when we were quite little, Uncle called usnto the study- that was in the old house- and it was dark- we went innd suddenly there stood..."
	"A Negro," chimed in Nicholas with a smile of delight. "Of course remember. Even now I don't know whether there really was a Negro, orf we only dreamed it or were told about him."
	"He was gray, you remember, and had white teeth, and stood andooked at us..."
	"Sonya, do you remember?" asked Nicholas.
	"Yes, yes, I do remember something too," Sonya answered timidly.
	"You know I have asked Papa and Mamma about that Negro," saidatasha, "and they say there was no Negro at all. But you see, youemember!"
	"Of course I do, I remember his teeth as if I had just seen them."
	"How strange it is! It's as if it were a dream! I like that."
	"And do you remember how we rolled hard-boiled eggs in the ballroom,nd suddenly two old women began spinning round on the carpet? Washat real or not? Do you remember what fun it was?"
	"Yes, and you remember how Papa in his blue overcoat fired a gunn the porch?"
	So they went through their memories, smiling with pleasure: nothe sad memories of old age, but poetic, youthful ones- thosempressions of one's most distant past in which dreams and realitieslend- and they laughed with quiet enjoyment.
	Sonya, as always, did not quite keep pace with them, though theyhared the same reminiscences.
	Much that they remembered had slipped from her mind, and what sheecalled did not arouse the same poetic feeling as they experienced.he simply enjoyed their pleasure and tried to fit in with it.
	She only really took part when they recalled Sonya's firstrrival. She told them how afraid she had been of Nicholas becausee had on a corded jacket and her nurse had told her that she, too,ould be sewn up with cords.
	"And I remember their telling me that you had been born under aabbage," said Natasha, and I remember that I dared not disbelievet then, but knew that it was not true, and I felt so uncomfortable."
	While they were talking a maid thrust her head in at the otheroor of the sitting room.
	"They have brought the cock, Miss," she said in a whisper.
	"It isn't wanted, Petya. Tell them to take it away," repliedatasha.
	In the middle of their talk in the sitting room, Dimmler came in andent up to the harp that stood there in a corner. He took off itsloth covering, and the harp gave out a jarring sound.
	"Mr. Dimmler, please play my favorite nocturne by Field," came theld countess' voice from the drawing room.
	Dimmler struck a chord and, turning to Natasha, Nicholas, and Sonya,emarked: "How quiet you young people are!"
	"Yes, we're philosophizing," said Natasha, glancing round for aoment and then continuing the conversation. They were nowiscussing dreams.
	Dimmler began to play; Natasha went on tiptoe noiselessly to theable, took up a candle, carried it out, and returned, seating herselfuietly in her former place. It was dark in the room especiallyhere they were sitting on the sofa, but through the big windows theilvery light of the full moon fell on the floor. Dimmler had finishedhe piece but still sat softly running his fingers over the strings,vidently uncertain whether to stop or to play something else.
	"Do you know," said Natasha in a whisper, moving closer toicholas and Sonya, "that when one goes on and on recallingemories, one at last begins to remember what happened before oneas in the world..."
	"That is metempsychosis," said Sonya, who had always learned well,nd remembered everything. "The Egyptians believed that our souls haveived in animals, and will go back into animals again."
	"No, I don't believe we ever were in animals," said Natasha, stilln a whisper though the music had ceased. "But I am certain that weere angels somewhere there, and have been here, and that is why weemember...."
	"May I join you?" said Dimmler who had come up quietly, and he satown by them.
	"If we have been angels, why have we fallen lower?" said Nicholas.No, that can't be!"
	"Not lower, who said we were lower?... How do I know what I wasefore?" Natasha rejoined with conviction. "The soul is immortal- wellhen, if I shall always live I must have lived before, lived for ahole eternity."
	"Yes, but it is hard for us to imagine eternity," remarkedimmler, who had joined the young folk with a mildly condescendingmile but now spoke as quietly and seriously as they.
	"Why is it hard to imagine eternity?" said Natasha. "It is nowoday, and it will be tomorrow, and always; and there was yesterday,nd the day before..."
	"Natasha! Now it's your turn. Sing me something," they heard theountess say. "Why are you sitting there like conspirators?"
	"Mamma, I don't at all want to," replied Natasha, but all the samehe rose.
	None of them, not even the middle-aged Dimmler, wanted to breakff their conversation and quit that corner in the sitting room, butatasha got up and Nicholas sat down at the clavichord. Standing assual in the middle of the hall and choosing the place where theesonance was best, Natasha began to sing her mother's favorite song.
	She had said she did not want to sing, but it was long since she hadung, and long before she again sang, as she did that evening. Theount, from his study where he was talking to Mitenka, heard hernd, like a schoolboy in a hurry to run out to play, blundered inis talk while giving orders to the steward, and at last stopped,hile Mitenka stood in front of him also listening and smiling.icholas did not take his eyes off his sister and drew breath inime with her. Sonya, as she listened, thought of the immenseifference there was between herself and her friend, and howmpossible it was for her to be anything like as bewitching as herousin. The old countess sat with a blissful yet sad smile and withears in her eyes, occasionally shaking her head. She thought ofatasha and of her own youth, and of how there was something unnaturalnd dreadful in this impending marriage of Natasha and Prince Andrew.
	Dimmler, who had seated himself beside the countess, listened withlosed eyes.
	"Ah, Countess," he said at last, "that's a European talent, sheas nothing to learn- what softness, tenderness, and strength...."
	"Ah, how afraid I am for her, how afraid I am!" said the countess,ot realizing to whom she was speaking. Her maternal instinct told herhat Natasha had too much of something, and that because of this sheould not be happy. Before Natasha had finished singing,ourteen-year-old Petya rushed in delightedly, to say that someummers had arrived.
	Natasha stopped abruptly.
	"Idiot!" she screamed at her brother and, running to a chair,hrew herself on it, sobbing so violently that she could not stopor a long time.
	"It's nothing, Mamma, really it's nothing; only Petya startlede," she said, trying to smile, but her tears still flowed and sobstill choked her.
	The mummers (some of the house serfs) dressed up as bears, Turks,nnkeepers, and ladies- frightening and funny- bringing in with themhe cold from outside and a feeling of gaiety, crowded, at firstimidly, into the anteroom, then hiding behind one another they pushednto the ballroom where, shyly at first and then more and more merrilynd heartily, they started singing, dancing, and playing Christmasames. The countess, when she had identified them and laughed at theirostumes, went into the drawing room. The count sat in the ballroom,miling radiantly and applauding the players. The young people hadisappeared.
	Half an hour later there appeared among the other mummers in theallroom an old lady in a hooped skirt- this was Nicholas. A Turkishirl was Petya. A clown was Dimmler. An hussar was Natasha, and aircassian was Sonya with burnt-cork mustache and eyebrows.
	After the condescending surprise, nonrecognition, and praise, fromhose who were not themselves dressed up, the young people decidedhat their costumes were so good that they ought to be shownlsewhere.
	Nicholas, who, as the roads were in splendid condition, wanted toake them all for a drive in his troyka, proposed to take with thembout a dozen of the serf mummers and drive to "Uncle's."
	"No, why disturb the old fellow?" said the countess. "Besides, yououldn't have room to turn round there. If you must go, go to theelyukovs'"
	Melyukova was a widow, who, with her family and their tutors andovernesses, lived three miles from the Rostovs.
	"That's right, my dear," chimed in the old count, thoroughlyroused. "I'll dress up at once and go with them. I'll make Pashettepen her eyes."
	But the countess would not agree to his going; he had had a badeg all these last days. It was decided that the count must not go,ut that if Louisa Ivanovna (Madame Schoss) would go with them, theoung ladies might go to the Melyukovs', Sonya, generally so timid andhy, more urgently than anyone begging Louisa Ivanovna not to refuse.
	Sonya's costume was the best of all. Her mustache and eyebrowsere extraordinarily becoming. Everyone told her she looked veryandsome, and she was in a spirited and energetic mood unusual wither. Some inner voice told her that now or never her fate would beecided, and in her male attire she seemed quite a different person.ouisa Ivanovna consented to go, and in half an hour four troykaleighs with large and small bells, their runners squeaking andhistling over the frozen snow, drove up to the porch.
	Natasha was foremost in setting a merry holiday tone, which, passingrom one to another, grew stronger and stronger and reached its climaxhen they all came out into the frost and got into the sleighs,alking, calling to one another, laughing, and shouting.
	Two of the troykas were the usual household sleighs, the third washe old count's with a trotter from the Orlov stud as shaft horse, theourth was Nicholas' own with a short shaggy black shaft horse.icholas, in his old lady's dress over which he had belted hisussar overcoat, stood in the middle of the sleigh, reins in hand.
	It was so light that he could see the moonlight reflected from theetal harness disks and from the eyes of the horses, who lookedound in alarm at the noisy party under the shadow of the porch roof.
	Natasha, Sonya, Madame Schoss, and two maids got into Nicholas'leigh; Dimmler, his wife, and Petya, into the old count's, and theest of the mummers seated themselves in the other two sleighs.
	"You go ahead, Zakhar!" shouted Nicholas to his father's coachman,ishing for a chance to race past him.
	The old count's troyka, with Dimmler and his party, started forward,queaking on its runners as though freezing to the snow, itseep-toned bell clanging. The side horses, pressing against the shaftsf the middle horse, sank in the snow, which was dry and glitteredike sugar, and threw it up.
	Nicholas set off, following the first sleigh; behind him thethers moved noisily, their runners squeaking. At first they drovet a steady trot along the narrow road. While they drove past thearden the shadows of the bare trees often fell across the road andid the brilliant moonlight, but as soon as they were past theence, the snowy plain bathed in moonlight and motionless spread outefore them glittering like diamonds and dappled with bluishhadows. Bang, bang! went the first sleigh over a cradle hole in thenow of the road, and each of the other sleighs jolted in the sameay, and rudely breaking the frost-bound stillness, the troykasegan to speed along the road, one after the other.
	"A hare's track, a lot of tracks!" rang out Natasha's voicehrough the frost-bound air.
	"How light it is, Nicholas!" came Sonya's voice.
	Nicholas glanced round at Sonya, and bent down to see her faceloser. Quite a new, sweet face with black eyebrows and mustacheseeped up at him from her sable furs- so close and yet so distant-n the moonlight.
	"That used to be Sonya," thought he, and looked at her closer andmiled.
	"What is it, Nicholas?"
	"Nothing," said he and turned again to the horses.
	When they came out onto the beaten highroad- polished by sleighunners and cut up by rough-shod hoofs, the marks of which wereisible in the moonlight- the horses began to tug at the reins ofheir own accord and increased their pace. The near side horse,rching his head and breaking into a short canter, tugged at hisraces. The shaft horse swayed from side to side, moving his ears asf asking: "Isn't it time to begin now?" In front, already far aheadhe deep bell of the sleigh ringing farther and farther off, the blackorses driven by Zakhar could be clearly seen against the whitenow. From that sleigh one could hear the shouts, laughter, and voicesf the mummers.
	"Gee up, my darlings!" shouted Nicholas, pulling the reins to oneide and flourishing the whip.
	It was only by the keener wind that met them and the jerks giveny the side horses who pulled harder- ever increasing their gallop-hat one noticed how fast the troyka was flying. Nicholas looked back.ith screams squeals, and waving of whips that caused even the shaftorses to gallop- the other sleighs followed. The shaft horse swungteadily beneath the bow over its head, with no thought oflackening pace and ready to put on speed when required.
	Nicholas overtook the first sleigh. They were driving downhill andoming out upon a broad trodden track across a meadow, near a river.
	"Where are we?" thought he. "It's the Kosoy meadow, I suppose. Buto- this is something new I've never seen before. This isn't the Kosoyeadow nor the Demkin hill, and heaven only knows what it is! It isomething new and enchanted. Well, whatever it may be..." And shoutingo his horses, he began to pass the first sleigh.
	Zakhar held back his horses and turned his face, which was alreadyovered with hoarfrost to his eyebrows.
	Nicholas gave the horses the rein, and Zakhar, stretching out hisrms, clucked his tongue and let his horses go.
	"Now, look out, master!" he cried.
	Faster still the two troykas flew side by side, and faster moved theeet of the galloping side horses. Nicholas began to draw ahead.akhar, while still keeping his arms extended, raised one hand withhe reins.
	"No you won't, master!" he shouted.
	Nicholas put all his horses to a gallop and passed Zakhar. Theorses showered the fine dry snow on the faces of those in the sleigh-eside them sounded quick ringing bells and they caught confusedlimpses of swiftly moving legs and the shadows of the troyka theyere passing. The whistling sound of the runners on the snow and theoices of girls shrieking were heard from different sides.
	Again checking his horses, Nicholas looked around him. They weretill surrounded by the magic plain bathed in moonlight and spangledith stars.
	"Zakhar is shouting that I should turn to the left, but why to theeft?" thought Nicholas. "Are we getting to the Melyukovs'? Is thiselyukovka? Heaven only knows where we are going, and heaven knowshat is happening to us- but it is very strange and pleasanthatever it is." And he looked round in the sleigh.
	"Look, his mustache and eyelashes are all white!" said one of thetrange, pretty, unfamiliar people- the one with fine eyebrows andustache.
	"I think this used to be Natasha," thought Nicholas, "and that wasadame Schoss, but perhaps it's not, and this Circassian with theustache I don't know, but I love her."
	"Aren't you cold?" he asked.
	They did not answer but began to laugh. Dimmler from the sleighehind shouted something- probably something funny- but they could notake out what he said.
	"Yes, yes!" some voices answered, laughing.
	"But here was a fairy forest with black moving shadows, and alitter of diamonds and a flight of marble steps and the silveroofs of fairy buildings and the shrill yells of some animals. Andf this is really Melyukovka, it is still stranger that we droveeaven knows where and have come to Melyukovka," thought Nicholas.
	It really was Melyukovka, and maids and footmen with merry facesame running, out to the porch carrying candles.
	"Who is it?" asked someone in the porch.
	"The mummers from the count's. I know by the horses," replied someoices.BK7|CH11
	CHAPTER XI
	Pelageya Danilovna Melyukova, a broadly built, energetic womanearing spectacles, sat in the drawing room in a loose dress,urrounded by her daughters whom she was trying to keep from feelingull. They were quietly dropping melted wax into snow and looking athe shadows the wax figures would throw on the wall, when they heardhe steps and voices of new arrivals in the vestibule.
	Hussars, ladies, witches, clowns, and bears, after clearing theirhroats and wiping the hoarfrost from their faces in the vestibule,ame into the ballroom where candles were hurriedly lighted. Thelown- Dimmler- and the lady- Nicholas- started a dance. Surrounded byhe screaming children the mummers, covering their faces andisguising their voices, bowed to their hostess and arrangedhemselves about the room.
	"Dear me! there's no recognizing them! And Natasha! See whom sheooks like! She really reminds me of somebody. But Herr Dimmler- isn'te good! I didn't know him! And how he dances. Dear me, there's aircassian. Really, how becoming it is to dear Sonya. And who is that?ell, you have cheered us up! Nikita and Vanya- clear away the tables!nd we were sitting so quietly. Ha, ha, ha!... The hussar, the hussar!ust like a boy! And the legs!... I can't look at him..." differentoices were saying.
	Natasha, the young Melyukovs' favorite, disappeared with them intohe back rooms where a cork and various dressing gowns and malearments were called for and received from the footman by bare girlishrms from behind the door. Ten minutes later, all the youngelyukovs joined the mummers.
	Pelageya Danilovna, having given orders to clear the rooms for theisitors and arranged about refreshments for the gentry and the serfs,ent about among the mummers without removing her spectacles,eering into their faces with a suppressed smile and failing toecognize any of them. It was not merely Dimmler and the Rostovs sheailed to recognize, she did not even recognize her own daughters,r her late husband's, dressing gowns and uniforms, which they had putn.
	"And who is is this?" she asked her governess, peering into the facef her own daughter dressed up as a Kazan-Tartar. "I suppose it is onef the Rostovs! Well, Mr. Hussar, and what regiment do you serven?" she asked Natasha. "Here, hand some fruit jelly to the Turk!" sherdered the butler who was handing things round. "That's not forbiddeny his law."
	Sometimes, as she looked at the strange but amusing capers cut byhe dancers, who- having decided once for all that being disguised, none would recognize them- were not at all shy, Pelageya Danilovnaid her face in her handkerchief, and her whole stout body shookith irrepressible, kindly, elderly laughter.
	"My little Sasha! Look at Sasha!" she said.
	After Russian country dances and chorus dances, Pelageya Danilovnaade the serfs and gentry join in one large circle: a ring, atring, and a silver ruble were fetched and they all played gamesogether.
	In an hour, all the costumes were crumpled and disordered. Theorked eyebrows and mustaches were smeared over the perspiring,lushed, and merry faces. Pelageya Danilovna began to recognize theummers, admired their cleverly contrived costumes, and particularlyow they suited the young ladies, and she thanked them all foraving entertained her so well. The visitors were invited to supper inhe drawing room, and the serfs had something served to them in theallroom.
	"Now to tell one's fortune in the empty bathhouse is frightening!"aid an old maid who lived with the Melyukovs, during supper.
	"Why?" said the eldest Melyukov girl.
	"You wouldn't go, it takes courage..."
	"I'll go," said Sonya.
	"Tell what happened to the young lady!" said the second Melyukovirl.
	"Well," began the old maid, "a young lady once went out, took aock, laid the table for two, all properly, and sat down. Afteritting a while, she suddenly hears someone coming... a sleighrives up with harness bells; she hears him coming! He comes in,ust in the shape of a man, like an officer- comes in and sits down toable with her."
	"Ah! ah!" screamed Natasha, rolling her eyes with horror.
	"Yes? And how... did he speak?"
	"Yes, like a man. Everything quite all right, and he beganersuading her; and she should have kept him talking till cockcrow,ut she got frightened, just got frightened and hid her face in herands. Then he caught her up. It was lucky the maids ran in justhen..."
	"Now, why frighten them?" said Pelageya Danilovna.
	"Mamma, you used to try your fate yourself..." said her daughter.
	"And how does one do it in a barn?" inquired Sonya.
	"Well, say you went to the barn now, and listened. It depends onhat you hear; hammering and knocking- that's bad; but a sound ofhifting grain is good and one sometimes hears that, too."
	"Mamma, tell us what happened to you in the barn."
	Pelageya Danilovna smiled.
	"Oh, I've forgotten..." she replied. "But none of you would go?"
	"Yes, I will; Pelageya Danilovna, let me! I'll go," said Sonya.
	"Well, why not, if you're not afraid?"
	"Louisa Ivanovna, may I?" asked Sonya.
	Whether they were playing the ring and string game or the ruble gamer talking as now, Nicholas did not leave Sonya's side, and gazed ater with quite new eyes. It seemed to him that it was only today,hanks to that burnt-cork mustache, that he had fully learned tonow her. And really, that evening, Sonya was brighter, more animated,nd prettier than Nicholas had ever seen her before.
	"So that's what she is like; what a fool I have been!" he thoughtazing at her sparkling eyes, and under the mustache a happy rapturousmile dimpled her cheeks, a smile he had never seen before.
	"I'm not afraid of anything," said Sonya. "May I go at once?" Sheot up.
	They told her where the barn was and how she should stand andisten, and they handed her a fur cloak. She threw this over heread and shoulders and glanced at Nicholas.
	"What a darling that girl is!" thought he. "And what have I beenhinking of till now?"
	Sonya went out into the passage to go to the barn. Nicholas wentastily to the front porch, saying he felt too hot. The crowd ofeople really had made the house stuffy.
	Outside, there was the same cold stillness and the same moon, butven brighter than before. The light was so strong and the snowparkled with so many stars that one did not wish to look up at theky and the real stars were unnoticed. The sky was black and dreary,hile the earth was gay.
	"I am a fool, a fool! what have I been waiting for?" thoughticholas. and running out from the porch he went round the corner ofhe house and along the path that led to the back porch. He knew Sonyaould pass that way. Halfway lay some snow-covered piles of firewoodnd across and along them a network of shadows from the bare oldime trees fell on the snow and on the path. This path led to thearn. The log walls of the barn and its snow-covered roof, that lookeds if hewn out of some precious stone, sparkled in the moonlight. Aree in the garden snapped with the frost, and then all was againerfectly silent. His bosom seemed to inhale not air but thetrength of eternal youth and gladness.
	From the back porch came the sound of feet descending the steps, theottom step upon which snow had fallen gave a ringing creak and heeard the voice of an old maidservant saying, "Straight, straight,long the path, Miss. Only, don't look back."
	"I am not afraid," answered Sonya's voice, and along the path towardicholas came the crunching, whistling sound of Sonya's feet in herhin shoes.
	Sonya came along, wrapped in her cloak. She was only a couple ofaces away when she saw him, and to her too he was not the Nicholashe had known and always slightly feared. He was in a woman's dress,ith tousled hair and a happy smile new to Sonya. She ran rapidlyoward him.
	"Quite different and yet the same," thought Nicholas, looking at herace all lit up by the moonlight. He slipped his arms under theloak that covered her head, embraced her, pressed her to him, andissed her on the lips that wore a mustache and had a smell of burntork. Sonya kissed him full on the lips, and disengaging her littleands pressed them to his cheeks.
	"Sonya!... Nicholas!"... was all they said. They ran to the barn andhen back again, re-entering, he by the front and she by the backorch.BK7|CH12
	CHAPTER XII
	When they all drove back from Pelageya Danilovna's, Natasha, wholways saw and noticed everything, arranged that she and Madame Schosshould go back in the sleigh with Dimmler, and Sonya with Nicholas andhe maids.
	On the way back Nicholas drove at a steady pace instead of racingnd kept peering by that fantastic all-transforming light into Sonya'sace and searching beneath the eyebrows and mustache for his formernd his present Sonya from whom he had resolved never to be partedgain. He looked and recognizing in her both the old and the newonya, and being reminded by the smell of burnt cork of theensation of her kiss, inhaled the frosty air with a full breastnd, looking at the ground flying beneath him and at the sparklingky, felt himself again in fairyland.
	"Sonya, is it well with thee?" he asked from time to time.
	"Yes!" she replied. "And with thee?"
	When halfway home Nicholas handed the reins to the coachman andan for a moment to Natasha's sleigh and stood on its wing.
	"Natasha!" he whispered in French, "do you know I have made up myind about Sonya?"
	"Have you told her?" asked Natasha, suddenly beaming all over withoy.
	"Oh, how strange you are with that mustache and those eyebrows!...atasha- are you glad?"
	"I am so glad, so glad! I was beginning to be vexed with you. Iid not tell you, but you have been treating her badly. What a hearthe has, Nicholas! I am horrid sometimes, but I was ashamed to beappy while Sonya was not," continued Natasha. "Now I am so glad!ell, run back to her."
	"No, wait a bit.... Oh, how funny you look!" cried Nicholas, peeringnto her face and finding in his sister too something new, unusual,nd bewitchingly tender that he had not seen in her before.Natasha, it's magical, isn't it?"
	"Yes," she replied. "You have done splendidly."
	"Had I seen her before as she is now," thought Nicholas, "I shouldong ago have asked her what to do and have done whatever she told me,nd all would have been well."
	"So you are glad and I have done right?"
	"Oh, quite right! I had a quarrel with Mamma some time ago about it.amma said she was angling for you. How could she say such a thing! nearly stormed at Mamma. I will never let anyone say anything bad ofonya, for there is nothing but good in her."
	"Then it's all right?" said Nicholas, again scrutinizing thexpression of his sister's face to see if she was in earnest. Thene jumped down and, his boots scrunching the snow, ran back to hisleigh. The same happy, smiling Circassian, with mustache andeaming eyes looking up from under a sable hood, was still sittinghere, and that Circassian was Sonya, and that Sonya was certainly hisuture happy and loving wife.
	When they reached home and had told their mother how they hadpent the evening at the Melyukovs', the girls went to theiredroom. When they had undressed, but without washing off the corkustaches, they sat a long time talking of their happiness. Theyalked of how they would live when they were married, how theirusbands would be friends, and how happy they would be. On Natasha'sable stood two looking glasses which Dunyasha had preparedeforehand.
	"Only when will all that be? I am afraid never.... It would be tooood!" said Natasha, rising and going to the looking glasses.
	"Sit down, Natasha; perhaps you'll see him," said Sonya.
	Natasha lit the candles, one on each side of one of the lookinglasses, and sat down.
	"I see someone with a mustache," said Natasha, seeing her own face.
	"You mustn't laugh, Miss," said Dunyasha.
	With Sonya's help and the maid's, Natasha got the glass she heldnto the right position opposite the other; her face assumed a seriousxpression and she sat silent. She sat a long time looking at theeceding line of candles reflected in the glasses and expectingfrom tales she had heard) to see a coffin, or him, Prince Andrew,n that last dim, indistinctly outlined square. But ready as she waso take the smallest speck for the image of a man or of a coffin,he saw nothing. She began blinking rapidly and moved away from theooking glasses.
	"Why is it others see things and I don't?" she said. "You sit downow, Sonya. You absolutely must, tonight! Do it for me.... Today Ieel so frightened!"
	Sonya sat down before the glasses, got the right position, and beganooking.
	"Now, Miss Sonya is sure to see something," whispered Dunyasha;while you do nothing but laugh."
	Sonya heard this and Natasha's whisper:
	"I know she will. She saw something last year."
	For about three minutes all were silent.
	"Of course she will!" whispered Natasha, but did not finish...uddenly Sonya pushed away the glass she was holding and covered heryes with her hand.
	"Oh, Natasha!" she cried.
	"Did you see? Did you? What was it?" exclaimed Natasha, holding uphe looking glass.
	Sonya had not seen anything, she was just wanting to blink and toet up when she heard Natasha say, "Of course she will!" She did notish to disappoint either Dunyasha or Natasha, but it was hard toit still. She did not herself know how or why the exclamation escapeder when she covered her eyes.
	"You saw him?" urged Natasha, seizing her hand.
	"Yes. Wait a bit... I... saw him," Sonya could not help saying,ot yet knowing whom Natasha meant by him, Nicholas or Prince Andrew.
	"But why shouldn't I say I saw something? Others do see! Besides whoan tell whether I saw anything or not?" flashed through Sonya's mind.
	"Yes, I saw him," she said.
	"How? Standing or lying?"
	"No, I saw... At first there was nothing, then I saw him lyingown."
	"Andrew lying? Is he ill?" asked Natasha, her frightened eyesixed on her friend.
	"No, on the contrary, on the contrary! His face was cheerful, and heurned to me." And when saying this she herself fancied she had reallyeen what she described.
	"Well, and then, Sonya?..."
	"After that, I could not make out what there was; something blue anded..."
	"Sonya! When will he come back? When shall I see him! O, God, howfraid I am for him and for myself and about everything!..." Natashaegan, and without replying to Sonya's words of comfort she got intoed, and long after her candle was out lay open-eyed and motionless,azing at the moonlight through the frosty windowpanes.BK7|CH13
	CHAPTER XIII
	Soon after the Christmas holidays Nicholas told his mother of hisove for Sonya and of his firm resolve to marry her. The countess, whoad long noticed what was going on between them and was expecting thiseclaration, listened to him in silence and then told her son thate might marry whom he pleased, but that neither she nor his fatherould give their blessing to such a marriage. Nicholas, for theirst time, felt that his mother was displeased with him and that,espite her love for him, she would not give way. Coldly, withoutooking at her son, she sent for her husband and, when he came,ried briefly and coldly to inform him of the facts, in her son'sresence, but unable to restrain herself she burst into tears ofexation and left the room. The old count began irresolutely todmonish Nicholas and beg him to abandon his purpose. Nicholas repliedhat he could not go back on his word, and his father, sighing andvidently disconcerted, very soon became silent and went in to theountess. In all his encounters with his son, the count was alwaysonscious of his own guilt toward him for having wasted the familyortune, and so he could not be angry with him for refusing to marryn heiress and choosing the dowerless Sonya. On this occasion, heas only more vividly conscious of the fact that if his affairs hadot been in disorder, no better wife for Nicholas than Sonya couldave been wished for, and that no one but himself with his Mitenka andis uncomfortable habits was to blame for the condition of theamily finances.
	The father and mother did not speak of the matter to their songain, but a few days later the countess sent for Sonya and, with aruelty neither of them expected, reproached her niece for trying toatch Nicholas and for ingratitude. Sonya listened silently withowncast eyes to the countess' cruel words, without understanding whatas required of her. She was ready to sacrifice everything for herenefactors. Self-sacrifice was her most cherished idea but in thisase she could not see what she ought to sacrifice, or for whom. Sheould not help loving the countess and the whole Rostov family, buteither could she help loving Nicholas and knowing that hisappiness depended on that love. She was silent and sad and did noteply. Nicholas felt the situation to be intolerable and went toave an explanation with his mother. He first implored her toorgive him and Sonya and consent to their marriage, then hehreatened that if she molested Sonya he would at once marry herecretly.
	The countess, with a coldness her son had never seen in herefore, replied that he was of age, that Prince Andrew was marryingithout his father's consent, and he could do the same, but that sheould never receive that intriguer as her daughter.
	Exploding at the word intriguer, Nicholas, raising his voice, toldis mother he had never expected her to try to force him to sell hiseelings, but if that were so, he would say for the last time....ut he had no time to utter the decisive word which the expressionf his face caused his mother to await with terror, and which woulderhaps have forever remained a cruel memory to them both. He hadot time to say it, for Natasha, with a pale and set face, entered theoom from the door at which she had been listening.
	"Nicholas, you are talking nonsense! Be quiet, be quiet, be quiet, Iell you!..." she almost screamed, so as to drown his voice.
	"Mamma darling, it's not at all so... my poor, sweet darling," sheaid to her mother, who conscious that they had been on the brink of aupture gazed at her son with terror, but in the obstinacy andxcitement of the conflict could not and would not give way.
	"Nicholas, I'll explain to you. Go away! Listen, Mamma darling,"aid Natasha.
	Her words were incoherent, but they attained the purpose at whichhe was aiming.
	The countess, sobbing heavily, hid her face on her daughter'sreast, while Nicholas rose, clutching his head, and left the room.
	Natasha set to work to effect a reconciliation, and so far succeededhat Nicholas received a promise from his mother that Sonya should note troubled, while he on his side promised not to undertake anythingithout his parents' knowledge.
	Firmly resolved, after putting his affairs in order in the regiment,o retire from the army and return and marry Sonya, Nicholas, serious,orrowful, and at variance with his parents, but, as it seemed to him,assionately in love, left at the beginning of January to rejoin hisegiment.
	After Nicholas had gone things in the Rostov household were moreepressing than ever, and the countess fell ill from mental agitation.
	Sonya was unhappy at the separation from Nicholas and still moreo on account of the hostile tone the countess could not help adoptingoward her. The count was more perturbed than ever by the condition ofis affairs, which called for some decisive action. Their town housend estate near Moscow had inevitably to be sold, and for this theyad to go to Moscow. But the countess' health obliged them to delayheir departure from day to day.
	Natasha, who had borne the first period of separation from heretrothed lightly and even cheerfully, now grew more agitated andmpatient every day. The thought that her best days, which she wouldave employed in loving him, were being vainly wasted, with nodvantage to anyone, tormented her incessantly. His letters for theost part irritated her. It hurt her to think that while she livednly in the thought of him, he was living a real life, seeing newlaces and new people that interested him. The more interesting hisetters were the more vexed she felt. Her letters to him, far fromiving her any comfort, seemed to her a wearisome and artificialbligation. She could not write, because she could not conceive theossibility of expressing sincerely in a letter even a thousandth partf what she expressed by voice, smile, and glance. She wrote to himormal, monotonous, and dry letters, to which she attached nomportance herself, and in the rough copies of which the countessorrected her mistakes in spelling.
	There was still no improvement in the countess' health, but it wasmpossible to defer the journey to Moscow any longer. Natasha'srousseau had to be ordered and the house sold. Moreover, Princendrew was expected in Moscow, where old Prince Bolkonski was spendinghe winter, and Natasha felt sure he had already arrived.
	So the countess remained in the country, and the count, taking Sonyand Natasha with him, went to Moscow at the end of January.BK8	                           BOOK EIGHT: 1811 - 12BK8|CH1
	CHAPTER I
	After Prince Andrews engagement to Natasha, Pierre without anypparent cause suddenly felt it impossible to go on living asefore. Firmly convinced as he was of the truths revealed to him byis benefactor, and happy as he had been in perfecting his inneran, to which he had devoted himself with such ardor- all the zestf such a life vanished after the engagement of Andrew and Natasha andhe death of Joseph Alexeevich, the news of which reached him almostt the same time. Only the skeleton of life remained: his house, arilliant wife who now enjoyed the favors of a very importantersonage, acquaintance with all Petersburg, and his court serviceith its dull formalities. And this life suddenly seemed to Pierrenexpectedly loathsome. He ceased keeping a diary, avoided the companyf the Brothers, began going to the Club again, drank a great deal,nd came once more in touch with the bachelor sets, leading such aife that the Countess Helene thought it necessary to speak severelyo him about it. Pierre felt that she right, and to avoid compromisinger went away to Moscow.
	In Moscow as soon as he entered his huge house in which the fadednd fading princesses still lived, with its enormous retinue; asoon as, driving through the town, he saw the Iberian shrine withnnumerable tapers burning before the golden covers of the icons,he Kremlin Square with its snow undisturbed by vehicles, the sleighrivers and hovels of the Sivtsev Vrazhok, those old Moscovites whoesired nothing, hurried nowhere, and were ending their dayseisurely; when he saw those old Moscow ladies, the Moscow balls,nd the English Club, he felt himself at home in a quiet haven. Inoscow he felt at peace, at home, warm and dirty as in an old dressingown.
	Moscow society, from the old women down to the children, receivedierre like a long-expected guest whose place was always readywaiting him. For Moscow society Pierre was the nicest, kindest,ost intellectual, merriest, and most magnanimous of cranks, aeedless, genial nobleman of the old Russian type. His purse waslways empty because it was open to everyone.
	Benefit performances, poor pictures, statues, benevolentocieties, gypsy choirs, schools, subscription dinners, sprees,reemasons, churches, and books- no one and nothing met with a refusalrom him, and had it not been for two friends who had borrowed largeums from him and taken him under their protection, he would haveiven everything away. There was never a dinner or soiree at thelub without him. As soon as he sank into his place on the sofafter two bottles of Margaux he was surrounded, and talking,isputing, and joking began. When there were quarrels, his kindlymile and well-timed jests reconciled the antagonists. The Masonicinners were dull and dreary when he was not there.
	When after a bachelor supper he rose with his amiable and kindlymile, yielding to the entreaties of the festive company to driveff somewhere with them, shouts of delight and triumph arose among theoung men. At balls he danced if a partner was needed. Young ladies,arried and unmarried, liked him because without making love to any ofhem, he was equally amiable to all, especially after supper. "Ilst charmant; il n'a pas de sexe,"* they said of him.
	*"He is charming; he has no sex."
	Pierre was one of those retired gentlemen-in-waiting of whom thereere hundreds good-humoredly ending their days in Moscow.
	How horrified he would have been seven years before, when he firstrrived from abroad, had he been told that there was no need for himo seek or plan anything, that his rut had long been shaped, eternallyredetermined, and that wriggle as he might, he would be what all inis position were. He could not have believed it! Had he not at oneime longed with all his heart to establish a republic in Russia; thenimself to be a Napoleon; then to be a philosopher; and then atrategist and the conqueror of Napoleon? Had he not seen theossibility of, and passionately desired, the regeneration of theinful human race, and his own progress to the highest degree oferfection? Had he not established schools and hospitals and liberatedis serfs?
	But instead of all that- here he was, the wealthy husband of annfaithful wife, a retired gentleman-in-waiting, fond of eating andrinking and, as he unbuttoned his waistcoat, of abusing theovernment a bit, a member of the Moscow English Club, and a universalavorite in Moscow society. For a long time he could not reconcileimself to the idea that he was one of those same retired Moscowentlemen-in-waiting he had so despised seven years before.
	Sometimes he consoled himself with the thought that he was onlyiving this life temporarily; but then he was shocked by the thoughtf how many, like himself, had entered that life and that Clubemporarily, with all their teeth and hair, and had only left ithen not a single tooth or hair remained.
	In moments of pride, when he thought of his position it seemed toim that he was quite different and distinct from those otheretired gentlemen-in-waiting he had formerly despised: they werempty, stupid, contented fellows, satisfied with their position,while I am still discontented and want to do something for mankind.ut perhaps all these comrades of mine struggled just like me andought something new, a path in life of their own, and like me wererought by force of circumstances, society, and race- by thatlemental force against which man is powerless- to the condition Im in," said he to himself in moments of humility; and after livingome time in Moscow he no longer despised, but began to grow fondf, to respect, and to pity his comrades in destiny, as he pitiedimself.
	Pierre longer suffered moments of despair, hypochondria, and disgustith life, but the malady that had formerly found expression in suchcute attacks was driven inwards and never left him for a moment.What for? Why? What is going on in the world?" he would ask himselfn perplexity several times a day, involuntarily beginning toeflect anew on the meaning of the phenomena of life; but knowing byxperience that there were no answers to these questions he made hasteo turn away from them, and took up a book, or hurried of to thelub or to Apollon Nikolaevich's, to exchange the gossip of the town.
	"Helene, who has never cared for anything but her own body and isne of the stupidest women in the world," thought Pierre, "is regardedy people as the acme of intelligence and refinement, and they payomage to her. Napoleon Bonaparte was despised by all as long as heas great, but now that he has become a wretched comedian themperor Francis wants to offer him his daughter in an illegalarriage. The Spaniards, through the Catholic clergy, offer praiseo God for their victory over the French on the fourteenth of June,nd the French, also through the Catholic clergy, offer praise becausen that same fourteenth of June they defeated the Spaniards. Myrother Masons swear by the blood that they are ready to sacrificeverything for their neighbor, but they do not give a ruble each tohe collections for the poor, and they intrigue, the Astraea Lodgegainst the Manna Seekers, and fuss about an authentic Scotch carpetnd a charter that nobody needs, and the meaning of which the very manho wrote it does not understand. We all profess the Christian lawf forgiveness of injuries and love of our neighbors, the law in honorf which we have built in Moscow forty times forty churches- butesterday a deserter was knouted to death and a minister of thatame law of love and forgiveness, a priest, gave the soldier a crosso kiss before his execution." So thought Pierre, and the whole ofhis general deception which everyone accepts, accustomed as he was tot, astonished him each time as if it were something new. "Inderstand the deception and confusion," he thought, "but how am Io tell them all that I see? I have tried, and have always foundhat they too in the depths of their souls understand it as I do,nd only try not to see it. So it appears that it must be so! But I-hat is to become of me?" thought he. He had the unfortunateapacity many men, especially Russians, have of seeing and believingn the possibility of goodness and truth, but of seeing the evil andalsehood of life too clearly to be able to take a serious part in it.very sphere of work was connected, in his eyes, with evil andeception. Whatever he tried to be, whatever he engaged in, the evilnd falsehood of it repulsed him and blocked every path of activity.et he had to live and to find occupation. It was too dreadful to bender the burden of these insoluble problems, so he abandonedimself to any distraction in order to forget them. He frequentedvery kind of society, drank much, bought pictures, engaged inuilding, and above all- read.
	He read, and read everything that came to hand. On coming home,hile his valets were still taking off his things, he picked up a booknd began to read. From reading he passed to sleeping, from sleepingo gossip in drawing rooms of the Club, from gossip to carousals andomen; from carousals back to gossip, reading, and wine. Drinkingecame more and more a physical and also a moral necessity. Though theoctors warned him that with his corpulence wine was dangerous forim, he drank a great deal. He was only quite at ease when havingoured several glasses of wine mechanically into his large mouth heelt a pleasant warmth in his body, an amiability toward all hisellows, and a readiness to respond superficially to every ideaithout probing it deeply. Only after emptying a bottle or two dide feel dimly that the terribly tangled skein of life which previouslyad terrified him was not as dreadful as he had thought. He was alwaysonscious of some aspect of that skein, as with a buzzing in hisead after dinner or supper he chatted or listened to conversationr read. But under the influence of wine he said to himself: "Itoesn't matter. I'll get it unraveled. I have a solution ready, butave no time now- I'll think it all out later on!" But the later onever came.
	In the morning, on an empty stomach, all the old questionsppeared as insoluble and terrible as ever, and Pierre hastilyicked up a book, and if anyone came to see him he was glad.
	Sometimes he remembered how he had heard that soldiers in war whenntrenched under the enemy's fire, if they have nothing to do, tryard to find some occupation the more easily to bear the danger. Toierre all men seemed like those soldiers, seeking refuge from life:ome in ambition, some in cards, some in framing laws, some inomen, some in toys, some in horses, some in politics, some inport, some in wine, and some in governmental affairs. "Nothing isrivial, and nothing is important, it's all the same- only to saveneself from it as best one can," thought Pierre. "Only not to see it,hat dreadful it!"BK8|CH2
	CHAPTER II
	At the beginning of winter Prince Nicholas Bolkonski and hisaughter moved to Moscow. At that time enthusiasm for the Emperorlexander's regime had weakened and a patriotic and anti-Frenchendency prevailed there, and this, together with his past and hisntellect and his originality, at once made Prince Nicholasolkonski an object of particular respect to the Moscovites and theenter of the Moscow opposition to the government.
	The prince had aged very much that year. He showed marked signs ofenility by a tendency to fall asleep, forgetfulness of quite recentvents, remembrance of remote ones, and the childish vanity with whiche accepted the role of head of the Moscow opposition. In spite ofhis the old man inspired in all his visitors alike a feeling ofespectful veneration- especially of an evening when he came in to tean his old-fashioned coat and powdered wig and, aroused by anyone,old his abrupt stories of the past, or uttered yet more abrupt andcathing criticisms of the present. For them all, that old-fashionedouse with its gigantic mirrors, pre-Revolution furniture, powderedootmen, and the stern shrewd old man (himself a relic of the pastentury) with his gentle daughter and the pretty Frenchwoman whoere reverently devoted to him presented a majestic and agreeablepectacle. But the visitors did not reflect that besides the couple ofours during which they saw their host, there were also twenty-twoours in the day during which the private and intimate life of theouse continued.
	Latterly that private life had become very trying for Princess Mary.here in Moscow she was deprived of her greatest pleasures- talks withhe pilgrims and the solitude which refreshed her at Bald Hills- andhe had none of the advantages and pleasures of city life. She did noto out into society; everyone knew that her father would not let hero anywhere without him, and his failing health prevented his goingut himself, so that she was not invited to dinners and eveningarties. She had quite abandoned the hope of getting married. Sheaw the coldness and malevolence with which the old prince receivednd dismissed the young men, possible suitors, who sometimesppeared at their house. She had no friends: during this visit tooscow she had been disappointed in the two who had been nearest toer. Mademoiselle Bourienne, with whom she had never been able to beuite frank, had now become unpleasant to her, and for various reasonsrincess Mary avoided her. Julie, with whom she had corresponded forhe last five years, was in Moscow, but proved to be quite alien toer when they met. Just then Julie, who by the death of her brothersad become one of the richest heiresses in Moscow, was in the fullhirl of society pleasures. She was surrounded by young men who, sheancied, had suddenly learned to appreciate her worth. Julie was athat stage in the life of a society woman when she feels that her lasthance of marrying has come and that her fate must be decided now orever. On Thursdays Princess Mary remembered with a mournful smilehat she now had no one to write to, since Julie- whose presenceave her no pleasure was here and they met every week. Like the oldmigre who declined to marry the lady with whom he had spent hisvenings for years, she regretted Julie's presence and having no oneo write to. In Moscow Princess Mary had no one to talk to, no oneo whom to confide her sorrow, and much sorrow fell to her lot justhen. The time for Prince Andrew's return and marriage waspproaching, but his request to her to prepare his father for it hadot been carried out; in fact, it seemed as if matters were quiteopeless, for at every mention of the young Countess Rostova the oldrince (who apart from that was usually in a bad temper) lostontrol of himself. Another lately added sorrow arose from the lessonshe gave her six year-old nephew. To her consternation she detected inerself in relation to little Nicholas some symptoms of her father'srritability. However often she told herself that she must not getrritable when teaching her nephew, almost every time that, pointer inand, she sat down to show him the French alphabet, she so longed toour her own knowledge quickly and easily into the child- who waslready afraid that Auntie might at any moment get angry- that atis slightest inattention she trembled, became flustered and heated,aised her voice, and sometimes pulled him by the arm and put him inhe corner. Having put him in the corner she would herself begin tory over her cruel, evil nature, and little Nicholas, following herxample, would sob, and without permission would leave his corner,ome to her, pull her wet hands from her face, and comfort her. Buthat distressed the princess most of all was her father'srritability, which was always directed against her and had of latemounted to cruelty. Had he forced her to prostrate herself to theround all night, had he beaten her or made her fetch wood or water,t would never have entered her mind to think her position hard; buthis loving despot- the more cruel because he loved her and for thateason tormented himself and her- knew how not merely to hurt andumiliate her deliberately, but to show her that she was always tolame for everything. Of late he had exhibited a new trait thatormented Princess Mary more than anything else; this was hisver-increasing intimacy with Mademoiselle Bourienne. The idea that athe first moment of receiving the news of his son's intentions hadccurred to him in jest- that if Andrew got married he himself wouldarry Bourienne- had evidently pleased him, and latterly he hadersistently, and as it seemed to Princess Mary merely to offender, shown special endearments to the companion and expressed hisissatisfaction with his daughter by demonstrations of love ofourienne.
	One day in Moscow in Princess Mary's presence (she thought herather did it purposely when she was there) the old prince kissedademoiselle Bourienne's hand and, drawing her to him, embraced herffectionately. Princess Mary flushed and ran out of the room. A fewinutes later Mademoiselle Bourienne came into Princess Mary's roommiling and making cheerful remarks in her agreeable voice. Princessary hastily wiped away her tears, went resolutely up toademoiselle Bourienne, and evidently unconscious of what she wasoing began shouting in angry haste at the Frenchwoman, her voicereaking: "It's horrible, vile, inhuman, to take advantage of theeakness..." She did not finish. "Leave my room," she exclaimed, andurst into sobs.
	Next day the prince did not say a word to his daughter, but sheoticed that at dinner he gave orders that Mademoiselle Bouriennehould be served first. After dinner, when the footman handed coffeend from habit began with the princess, the prince suddenly grewurious, threw his stick at Philip, and instantly gave instructions toave him conscripted for the army.
	"He doesn't obey... I said it twice... and he doesn't obey! She ishe first person in this house; she's my best friend," cried therince. "And if you allow yourself," he screamed in a fury, addressingrincess Mary for the first time, "to forget yourself again before hers you dared to do yesterday, I will show you who is master in thisouse. Go! Don't let me set eyes on you; beg her pardon!"
	Princess Mary asked Mademoiselle Bourienne's pardon, and also herather's pardon for herself and for Philip the footman, who had beggedor her intervention.
	At such moments something like a pride of sacrifice gathered iner soul. And suddenly that father whom she had judged would lookor his spectacles in her presence, fumbling near them and noteeing them, or would forget something that had just occurred, or take false step with his failing legs and turn to see if anyone hadoticed his feebleness, or, worst of all, at dinner when there were noisitors to excite him would suddenly fall asleep, letting hisapkin drop and his shaking head sink over his plate. "He is old andeeble, and I dare to condemn him!" she thought at such moments,ith a feeling of revulsion against herself.BK8|CH3
	CHAPTER III
	In 1811 there was living in Moscow a French doctor- Metivier- whoad rapidly become the fashion. He was enormously tall, handsome,miable as Frenchmen are, and was, as all Moscow said, anxtraordinarily clever doctor. He was received in the best housesot merely as a doctor, but as an equal.
	Prince Nicholas had always ridiculed medicine, but latterly onademoiselle Bourienne's advice had allowed this doctor to visit himnd had grown accustomed to him. Metivier came to see the prince aboutwice a week.
	On December 6- St. Nicholas' Day and the prince's name day- alloscow came to the prince's front door but he gave orders to admito one and to invite to dinner only a small number, a list of whome gave to Princess Mary.
	Metivier, who came in the morning with his felicitations, consideredt proper in his quality of doctor de forcer la consigne,* as heold Princess Mary, and went in to see the prince. It happened that onhat morning of his name day the prince was in one of his worst moods.e had been going about the house all the morning finding fault withveryone and pretending not to understand what was said to him and noto be understood himself. Princess Mary well knew this mood of quietbsorbed querulousness, which generally culminated in a burst of rage,nd she went about all that morning as though facing a cocked andoaded gun and awaited the inevitable explosion. Until the doctor'srrival the morning had passed off safely. After admitting the doctor,rincess Mary sat down with a book in the drawing room near the doorhrough which she could hear all that passed in the study.
	*To force the guard.
	At first she heard only Metivier's voice, then her father's, thenoth voices began speaking at the same time, the door was flungpen, and on the threshold appeared the handsome figure of theerrified Metivier with his shock of black hair, and the prince in hisressing gown and fez, his face distorted with fury and the pupilsf his eyes rolled downwards.
	"You don't understand?" shouted the prince, "but I do! French spy,lave of Buonaparte, spy, get out of my house! Be off, I tell you..."
	Metivier, shrugging his shoulders, went up to Mademoiselle Bourienneho at the sound of shouting had run in from an adjoining room.
	"The prince is not very well: bile and rush of blood to the head.eep calm, I will call again tomorrow," said Metivier; and putting hisingers to his lips he hastened away.
	Through the study door came the sound of slippered feet and the cry:Spies, traitors, traitors everywhere! Not a moment's peace in mywn house!"
	After Metivier's departure the old prince called his daughter in,nd the whole weight of his wrath fell on her. She was to blame that apy had been admitted. Had he not told her, yes, told her to make aist, and not to admit anyone who was not on that list? Then why washat scoundrel admitted? She was the cause of it all. With her, heaid, he could not have a moment's peace and could not die quietly.
	"No, ma'am! We must part, we must part! Understand that,nderstand it! I cannot endure any more," he said, and left theoom. Then, as if afraid she might find some means of consolation,e returned and trying to appear calm added: "And don't imagine I haveaid this in a moment of anger. I am calm. I have thought it over, andt will be carried out- we must part; so find some place forourself...." But he could not restrain himself and with the virulencef which only one who loves is capable, evidently suffering himself,e shook his fists at her and screamed:
	"If only some fool would marry her!" Then he slammed the door,ent for Mademoiselle Bourienne, and subsided into his study.
	At two o'clock the six chosen guests assembled for dinner.
	These guests- the famous Count Rostopchin, Prince Lopukhin withis nephew, General Chatrov an old war comrade of the prince's, and ofhe younger generation Pierre and Boris Drubetskoy- awaited the princen the drawing room.
	Boris, who had come to Moscow on leave a few days before, had beennxious to be presented to Prince Nicholas Bolkonski, and hadontrived to ingratiate himself so well that the old prince in hisase made an exception to the rule of not receiving bachelors in hisouse.
	The prince's house did not belong to what is known as fashionableociety, but his little circle- though not much talked about inown- was one it was more flattering to be received in than any other.oris had realized this the week before when the commander in chief inis presence invited Rostopchin to dinner on St. Nicholas' Day, andostopchin had replied that he could not come:
	"On that day I always go to pay my devotions to the relics of Princeicholas Bolkonski."
	"Oh, yes, yes!" replied the commander in chief. "How is he?..."
	The small group that assembled before dinner in the loftyld-fashioned drawing room with its old furniture resembled the solemnathering of a court of justice. All were silent or talked in lowones. Prince Nicholas came in serious and taciturn. Princess Maryeemed even quieter and more diffident than usual. The guests wereeluctant to address her, feeling that she was in no mood for theironversation. Count Rostopchin alone kept the conversation going,ow relating the latest town news, and now the latest politicalossip.
	Lopukhin and the old general occasionally took part in theonversation. Prince Bolkonski listened as a presiding judgeeceives a report, only now and then, silently or by a brief word,howing that he took heed of what was being reported to him. Theone of the conversation was such as indicated that no one approved ofhat was being done in the political world. Incidents were relatedvidently confirming the opinion that everything was going from bad toorse, but whether telling a story or giving an opinion the speakerlways stopped, or was stopped, at the point beyond which hisriticism might touch the sovereign himself.
	At dinner the talk turned on the latest political news: Napoleon'seizure of the Duke of Oldenburg's territory, and the Russian Note,ostile to Napoleon, which had been sent to all the European courts.
	"Bonaparte treats Europe as a pirate does a captured vessel," saidount Rostopchin, repeating a phrase he had uttered several timesefore. "One only wonders at the long-suffering or blindness of therowned heads. Now the Pope's turn has come and Bonaparte doesn'tcruple to depose the head of the Catholic Church- yet all keepilent! Our sovereign alone has protested against the seizure of theuke of Oldenburg's territory, and even..." Count Rostopchin paused,eeling that he had reached the limit beyond which censure wasmpossible.
	"Other territories have been offered in exchange for the Duchy ofldenburg," said Prince Bolkonski. "He shifts the Dukes about as Iight move my serfs from Bald Hills to Bogucharovo or my Ryazanstates."
	"The Duke of Oldenburg bears his misfortunes with admirable strengthf character and resignation," remarked Boris, joining inespectfully.
	He said this because on his journey from Petersburg he had had theonor of being presented to the Duke. Prince Bolkonski glanced athe young man as if about to say something in reply, but changed hisind, evidently considering him too young.
	"I have read our protests about the Oldenburg affair and wasurprised how badly the Note was worded," remarked Count Rostopchin inhe casual tone of a man dealing with a subject quite familiar to him.
	Pierre looked at Rostopchin with naive astonishment, notnderstanding why he should be disturbed by the bad composition of theote.
	"Does it matter, Count, how the Note is worded," he asked, "soong as its substance is forcible?"
	"My dear fellow, with our five hundred thousand troops it shoulde easy to have a good style," returned Count Rostopchin.
	Pierre now understood the count's dissatisfaction with the wordingf the Note.
	"One would have thought quill drivers enough had sprung up,"emarked the old prince. "There in Petersburg they are always writing-ot notes only but even new laws. My Andrew there has written ahole volume of laws for Russia. Nowadays they are always writing!"nd he laughed unnaturally.
	There was a momentary pause in the conversation; the old generalleared his throat to draw attention.
	"Did you hear of the last event at the review in Petersburg? Theigure cut by the new French ambassador."
	"Eh? Yes, I heard something: he said something awkward in Hisajesty's presence."
	"His Majesty drew attention to the Grenadier division and to thearch past," continued the general, "and it seems the ambassadorook no notice and allowed himself to reply that: 'We in France pay nottention to such trifles!' The Emperor did not condescend to reply.t the next review, they say, the Emperor did not once deign toddress him."
	All were silent. On this fact relating to the Emperor personally, itas impossible to pass any judgment.
	"Impudent fellows!" said the prince. "You know Metivier? I turnedim out of my house this morning. He was here; they admitted him spitef my request that they should let no one in," he went on, glancingngrily at his daughter.
	And he narrated his whole conversation with the French doctor andhe reasons that convinced him that Metivier was a spy. Though theseeasons were very insufficient and obscure, no one made any rejoinder.
	After the roast, champagne was served. The guests rose toongratulate the old prince. Princess Mary, too, went round to him.
	He gave her a cold, angry look and offered her his wrinkled,lean-shaven cheek to kiss. The whole expression of his face tolder that he had not forgotten the morning's talk, that his decisionemained in force, and only the presence of visitors hindered hispeaking of it to her now.
	When they went into the drawing room where coffee was served, theld men sat together.
	Prince Nicholas grew more animated and expressed his views on thempending war.
	He said that our wars with Bonaparte would be disastrous so longs we sought alliances with the Germans and thrust ourselves intouropean affairs, into which we had been drawn by the Peace of Tilsit.We ought not to fight either for or against Austria. Our politicalnterests are all in the East, and in regard to Bonaparte the onlyhing is to have an armed frontier and a firm policy, and he willever dare to cross the Russian frontier, as was the case in 1807!"
	"How can we fight the French, Prince?" said Count Rostopchin. "Cane arm ourselves against our teachers and divinities? Look at ourouths, look at our ladies! The French are our Gods: Paris is ouringdom of Heaven."
	He began speaking louder, evidently to be heard by everyone.
	"French dresses, French ideas, French feelings! There now, youurned Metivier out by the scruff of his neck because he is arenchman and a scoundrel, but our ladies crawl after him on theirnees. I went to a party last night, and there out of five ladieshree were Roman Catholics and had the Pope's indulgence for doingoolwork on Sundays. And they themselves sit there nearly naked,ike the signboards at our Public Baths if I may say so. Ah, whenne looks at our young people, Prince, one would like to take Peterhe Great's old cudgel out of the museum and belabor them in theussian way till all the nonsense jumps out of them."
	All were silent. The old prince looked at Rostopchin with a smilend wagged his head approvingly.
	"Well, good-by, your excellency, keep well!" said Rostopchin,etting up with characteristic briskness and holding out his hand tohe prince.
	"Good-by, my dear fellow.... His words are music, I never tire ofearing him!" said the old prince, keeping hold of the hand andffering his cheek to be kissed.
	Following Rostopchin's example the others also rose.BK8|CH4
	CHAPTER IV
	Princess Mary as she sat listening to the old men's talk andaultfinding, understood nothing of what she heard; she onlyondered whether the guests had all observed her father's hostilettitude toward her. She did not even notice the special attentionsnd amiabilities shown her during dinner by Boris Drubetskoy, whoas visiting them for the third time already.
	Princess Mary turned with absent-minded questioning look toierre, who hat in hand and with a smile on his face was the last ofhe guests to approach her after the old prince had gone out andhey were left alone in the drawing room.
	"May I stay a little longer?" he said, letting his stout body sinknto an armchair beside her.
	"Oh yes," she answered. "You noticed nothing?" her look asked.
	Pierre was in an agreeable after-dinner mood. He looked straightefore him and smiled quietly.
	"Have you known that young man long, Princess?" he asked.
	"Who?"
	"Drubetskoy."
	"No, not long..."
	"Do you like him?"
	"Yes, he is an agreeable young man.... Why do you ask me that?" saidrincess Mary, still thinking of that morning's conversation wither father.
	"Because I have noticed that when a young man comes on leave frometersburg to Moscow it is usually with the object of marrying aneiress."
	"You have observed that?" said Princess Mary.
	"Yes," returned Pierre with a smile, "and this young man now managesatters so that where there is a wealthy heiress there he is too. Ian read him like a book. At present he is hesitating whom to layiege to- you or Mademoiselle Julie Karagina. He is very attentiveo her."
	"He visits them?"
	"Yes, very often. And do you know the new way of courting?" saidierre with an amused smile, evidently in that cheerful mood of goodumored raillery for which he so often reproached himself in hisiary.
	"No," replied Princess Mary.
	"To please Moscow girls nowadays one has to be melancholy. He isery melancholy with Mademoiselle Karagina," said Pierre.
	"Really?" asked Princess Mary, looking into Pierre's kindly face andtill thinking of her own sorrow. "It would be a relief," thought she,if I ventured to confide what I am feeling to someone. I shouldike to tell everything to Pierre. He is kind and generous. It woulde a relief. He would give me advice."
	"Would you marry him?"
	"Oh, my God, Count, there are moments when I would marry anybody!"he cried suddenly to her own surprise and with tears in her voice.Ah, how bitter it is to love someone near to you and to feel that..."he went on in a trembling voice, "that you can do nothing for him butrieve him, and to know that you cannot alter this. Then there is onlyne thing left- to go away, but where could I go?"
	"What is wrong? What is it, Princess?"
	But without finishing what she was saying, Princess Mary burstnto tears.
	"I don't know what is the matter with me today. Don't take anyotice- forget what I have said!"
	Pierre's gaiety vanished completely. He anxiously questioned therincess, asked her to speak out fully and confide her grief to him;ut she only repeated that she begged him to forget what she had said,hat she did not remember what she had said, and that she had norouble except the one he knew of- that Prince Andrew's marriagehreatened to cause a rupture between father and son.
	"Have you any news of the Rostovs?" she asked, to change theubject. "I was told they are coming soon. I am also expectingndrew any day. I should like them to meet here."
	"And how does he now regard the matter?" asked Pierre, referringo the old prince.
	Princess Mary shook her head.
	"What is to be done? In a few months the year will be up. Thehing is impossible. I only wish I could spare my brother the firstoments. I wish they would come sooner. I hope to be friends with her.ou have known them a long time," said Princess Mary. "Tell meonestly the whole truth: what sort of girl is she, and what do youhink of her?- The real truth, because you know Andrew is risking souch doing this against his father's will that I should like tonow..."
	An undefined instinct told Pierre that these explanations, andepeated requests to be told the whole truth, expressed ill-will onhe princess' part toward her future sister-in-law and a wish thate should disapprove of Andrew's choice; but in reply he said whate felt rather than what he thought.
	"I don't know how to answer your question," he said, blushingithout knowing why. "I really don't know what sort of girl she is; can't analyze her at all. She is enchanting, but what makes her so Ion't know. That is all one can say about her."
	Princess Mary sighed, and the expression on her face said: "Yes,hat's what I expected and feared."
	"Is she clever?" she asked.
	Pierre considered.
	"I think not," he said, "and yet- yes. She does not deign to belever.... Oh no, she is simply enchanting, and that is all."
	Princess Mary again shook her head disapprovingly.
	"Ah, I so long to like her! Tell her so if you see her before I do."
	"I hear they are expected very soon," said Pierre.
	Princess Mary told Pierre of her plan to become intimate with heruture sister-in-law as soon as the Rostovs arrived and to try toccustom the old prince to her.BK8|CH5
	CHAPTER V
	Boris had not succeeded in making a wealthy match in Petersburg,o with the same object in view he came to Moscow. There he waveredetween the two richest heiresses, Julie and Princess Mary. Thoughrincess Mary despite her plainness seemed to him more attractive thanulie, he, without knowing why, felt awkward about paying court toer. When they had last met on the old prince's name day, she hadnswered at random all his attempts to talk sentimentally, evidentlyot listening to what he was saying.
	Julie on the contrary accepted his attentions readily, though in aanner peculiar to herself.
	She was twenty-seven. After the death of her brothers she had becomeery wealthy. She was by now decidedly plain, but thought herselfot merely as good-looking as before but even far more attractive. Sheas confirmed in this delusion by the fact that she had become aery wealthy heiress and also by the fact that the older she grewhe less dangerous she became to men, and the more freely they couldssociate with her and avail themselves of her suppers, soirees, andhe animated company that assembled at her house, without incurringny obligation. A man who would have been afraid ten years before ofoing every day to the house when there was a girl of seventeen there,or fear of compromising her and committing himself, would now gooldly every day and treat her not as a marriageable girl but as aexless acquaintance.
	That winter the Karagins' house was the most agreeable andospitable in Moscow. In addition to the formal evening and dinnerarties, a large company, chiefly of men, gathered there every day,upping at midnight and staying till three in the morning. Julie neverissed a ball, a promenade, or a play. Her dresses were always ofhe latest fashion. But in spite of that she seemed to beisillusioned about everything and told everyone that she did notelieve either in friendship or in love, or any of the joys of life,nd expected peace only "yonder." She adopted the tone of one whoas suffered a great disappointment, like a girl who has either losthe man she loved or been cruelly deceived by him. Though nothing ofhe kind had happened to her she was regarded in that light, and hadven herself come to believe that she had suffered much in life.his melancholy, which did not prevent her amusing herself, did notinder the young people who came to her house from passing the timeleasantly. Every visitor who came to the house paid his tribute tohe melancholy mood of the hostess, and then amused himself withociety gossip, dancing, intellectual games, and bouts rimes, whichere in vogue at the Karagins'. Only a few of these young men, amonghem Boris, entered more deeply into Julie's melancholy, and withhese she had prolonged conversations in private on the vanity ofll worldly things, and to them she showed her albums filled withournful sketches, maxims, and verses.
	To Boris, Julie was particularly gracious: she regretted his earlyisillusionment with life, offered him such consolation ofriendship as she who had herself suffered so much could render, andhowed him her album. Boris sketched two trees in the album and wrote:Rustic trees, your dark branches shed gloom and melancholy upon me."
	On another page he drew a tomb, and wrote:
	    La mort est secourable et la mort est tranquille.
	    Ah! contre les douleurs il n'y a pas d'autre asile.*
	*Death gives relief and death is peaceful.
	 Ah! from suffering there is no other refuge.ulia said this was charming
	"There is something so enchanting in the smile of melancholy," sheaid to Boris, repeating word for word a passage she had copied from aook. "It is a ray of light in the darkness, a shade between sadnessnd despair, showing the possibility of consolation."
	In reply Boris wrote these lines:
	    Aliment de poison d'une ame trop sensible,
	    Toi, sans qui le bonheur me serait impossible,
	    Tendre melancholie, ah, viens me consoler,
	    Viens calmer les tourments de ma sombre retraite,
	    Et mele une douceur secrete
	    A ces pleurs que je sens couler.*
	*Poisonous nourishment of a too sensitive soul,
	 Thou, without whom happiness would for me be impossible,
	 Tender melancholy, ah, come to console me,
	 Come to calm the torments of my gloomy retreat,
	 And mingle a secret sweetness
	 With these tears that I feel to be flowing.
	For Boris, Julie played most doleful nocturnes on her harp. Borisead Poor Liza aloud to her, and more than once interrupted theeading because of the emotions that choked him. Meeting at largeatherings Julie and Boris looked on one another as the only souls whonderstood one another in a world of indifferent people.
	Anna Mikhaylovna, who often visited the Karagins, while playingards with the mother made careful inquiries as to Julie's dowryshe was to have two estates in Penza and the Nizhegorod forests).nna Mikhaylovna regarded the refined sadness that united her son tohe wealthy Julie with emotion, and resignation to the Divine will.
	"You are always charming and melancholy, my dear Julie," she said tohe daughter. "Boris says his soul finds repose at your house. Heas suffered so many disappointments and is so sensitive," said she tohe mother. "Ah, my dear, I can't tell you how fond I have grown ofulie latterly," she said to her son. "But who could help lovinger? She is an angelic being! Ah, Boris, Boris!"- she paused. "And how pity her mother," she went on; "today she showed me her accounts andetters from Penza (they have enormous estates there), and she, poorhing, has no one to help her, and they do cheat her so!"
	Boris smiled almost imperceptibly while listening to his mother.e laughed blandly at her naive diplomacy but listened to what she hado say, and sometimes questioned her carefully about the Penza andizhegorod estates.
	Julie had long been expecting a proposal from her melancholydorer and was ready to accept it; but some secret feeling ofepulsion for her, for her passionate desire to get married, for herrtificiality, and a feeling of horror at renouncing the possibilityf real love still restrained Boris. His leave was expiring. Hepent every day and whole days at the Karagins', and every day onhinking the matter over told himself that he would proposeomorrow. But in Julie's presence, looking at her red face and chinnearly always powdered), her moist eyes, and her expression ofontinual readiness to pass at once from melancholy to an unnaturalapture of married bliss, Boris could not utter the decisive words,hough in imagination he had long regarded himself as the possessor ofhose Penza and Nizhegorod estates and had apportioned the use ofhe income from them. Julie saw Boris' indecision, and sometimes thehought occurred to her that she was repulsive to him, but hereminine self-deception immediately supplied her with consolation, andhe told herself that he was only shy from love. Her melancholy,owever, began to turn to irritability, and not long before Boris'eparture she formed a definite plan of action. Just as Boris' leavef absence was expiring, Anatole Kuragin made his appearance inoscow, and of course in the Karagins' drawing room, and Julie,uddenly abandoning her melancholy, became cheerful and very attentiveo Kuragin.
	"My dear," said Anna Mikhaylovna to her son, "I know from a reliableource that Prince Vasili has sent his son to Moscow to get himarried to Julie. I am so fond of Julie that I should be sorry forer. What do you think of it, my dear?"
	The idea of being made a fool of and of having thrown away thathole month of arduous melancholy service to Julie, and of seeingll the revenue from the Penza estates which he had already mentallypportioned and put to proper use fall into the hands of another,nd especially into the hands of that idiot Anatole, pained Boris.e drove to the Karagins' with the firm intention of proposing.ulie met him in a gay, careless manner, spoke casually of how she hadnjoyed yesterday's ball, and asked when he was leaving. Thoughoris had come intentionally to speak of his love and thereforeeant to be tender, he began speaking irritably of femininenconstancy, of how easily women can turn from sadness to joy, and howheir moods depend solely on who happens to be paying court to them.ulie was offended and replied that it was true that a woman needsariety, and the same thing over and over again would weary anyone.
	"Then I should advise you..." Boris began, wishing to sting her; butt that instant the galling thought occurred to him that he might haveo leave Moscow without having accomplished his aim, and have vainlyasted his efforts- which was a thing he never allowed to happen.
	He checked himself in the middle of the sentence, lowered his eyeso avoid seeing her unpleasantly irritated and irresolute face, andaid:
	"I did not come here at all to quarrel with you. On the contrary..."
	He glanced at her to make sure that he might go on. Her irritabilityad suddenly quite vanished, and her anxious, imploring eyes wereixed on him with greedy expectation. "I can always arrange so asot to see her often," thought Boris. "The affair has been begun andust be finished!" He blushed hotly, raised his eyes to hers, andaid:
	"You know my feelings for you!"
	There was no need to say more: Julie's face shone with triumph andelf-satisfaction; but she forced Boris to say all that is said onuch occasions- that he loved her and had never loved any otheroman more than her. She knew that for the Penza estates andizhegorod forests she could demand this, and she received what sheemanded.
	The affianced couple, no longer alluding to trees that shed gloomnd melancholy upon them, planned the arrangements of a splendid housen Petersburg, paid calls, and prepared everything for a brilliantedding.BK8|CH6
	CHAPTER VI
	At the end of January old Count Rostov went to Moscow with Natashand Sonya. The countess was still unwell and unable to travel but itas impossible to wait for her recovery. Prince Andrew was expected inoscow any day, the trousseau had to be ordered and the estate nearoscow had to be sold, besides which the opportunity of presenting hisuture daughter-in-law to old Prince Bolkonski while he was inoscow could not be missed. The Rostovs' Moscow house had not beeneated that winter and, as they had come only for a short time and theountess was not with them, the count decided to stay with Maryamitrievna Akhrosimova, who had long been pressing her hospitalityn them.
	Late one evening the Rostovs' four sleighs drove into Maryamitrievna's courtyard in the old Konyusheny street. Maryamitrievna lived alone. She had already married off her daughter,nd her sons were all in the service.
	She held herself as erect, told everyone her opinion as candidly,oudly, and bluntly as ever, and her whole bearing seemed a reproacho others for any weakness, passion, or temptation- the possibility ofhich she did not admit. From early in the morning, wearing a dressingacket, she attended to her household affairs, and then she drove out:n holy days to church and after the service to jails and prisons onffairs of which she never spoke to anyone. On ordinary days, afterressing, she received petitioners of various classes, of whom thereere always some. Then she had dinner, a substantial and appetizingeal at which there were always three or four guests; after dinner shelayed a game of boston, and at night she had the newspapers or aew book read to her while she knitted. She rarely made an exceptionnd went out to pay visits, and then only to the most importantersons in the town.
	She had not yet gone to bed when the Rostovs arrived and theulley of the hall door squeaked from the cold as it let in theostovs and their servants. Marya Dmitrievna, with her spectaclesanging down on her nose and her head flung back, stood in the halloorway looking with a stern, grim face at the new arrivals. One mightave thought she was angry with the travelers and would immediatelyurn them out, had she not at the same time been giving carefulnstructions to the servants for the accommodation of the visitors andheir belongings.
	"The count's things? Bring them here," she said, pointing to theortmanteaus and not greeting anyone. "The young ladies'? There to theeft. Now what are you dawdling for?" she cried to the maids. "Get theamovar ready!... You've grown plumper and prettier," she remarked,rawing Natasha (whose cheeks were glowing from the cold) to her byhe hood. "Foo! You are cold! Now take off your things, quick!" shehouted to the count who was going to kiss her hand. "You're halfrozen, I'm sure! Bring some rum for tea!... Bonjour, Sonya dear!" shedded, turning to Sonya and indicating by this French greeting herlightly contemptuous though affectionate attitude toward her.
	When they came in to tea, having taken off their outdoor thingsnd tidied themselves up after their journey, Marya Dmitrievnaissed them all in due order.
	"I'm heartily glad you have come and are staying with me. It wasigh time," she said, giving Natasha a significant look. "The oldan is here and his son's expected any day. You'll have to make hisquaintance. But we'll speak of that later on," she added, glancing atonya with a look that showed she did not want to speak of it in herresence. "Now listen," she said to the count. "What do you wantomorrow? Whom will you send for? Shinshin?" she crooked one of heringers. "The sniveling Anna Mikhaylovna? That's two. She's hereith her son. The son is getting married! Then Bezukhov, eh? He isere too, with his wife. He ran away from her and she came gallopingfter him. He dined with me on Wednesday. As for them"- and sheointed to the girls- "tomorrow I'll take them first to the Iberianhrine of the Mother of God, and then we'll drive to theuper-Rogue's. I suppose you'll have everything new. Don't judge bye: sleeves nowadays are this size! The other day young Princess Irinaasilevna came to see me; she was an awful sight- looked as if she hadut two barrels on her arms. You know not a day passes now withoutome new fashion.... And what have you to do yourself?" she askedhe count sternly.
	"One thing has come on top of another: her rags to buy, and now aurchaser has turned up for the Moscow estate and for the house. Ifou will be so kind, I'll fix a time and go down to the estate justor a day, and leave my lassies with you."
	"All right. All right. They'll be safe with me, as safe as inhancery! I'll take them where they must go, scold them a bit, and pethem a bit," said Marya Dmitrievna, touching her goddaughter andavorite, Natasha, on the cheek with her large hand.
	Next morning Marya Dmitrievna took the young ladies to the Iberianhrine of the Mother of God and to Madame Suppert-Roguet, who was sofraid of Marya Dmitrievna that she always let her have costumes at loss merely to get rid of her. Marya Dmitrievna ordered almost thehole trousseau. When they got home she turned everybody out of theoom except Nataisha, and then called her pet to her armchair.
	"Well, now we'll talk. I congratulate you on your betrothed.ou've hooked a fine fellow! I am glad for your sake and I've knownim since he was so high." She held her hand a couple of feet from theround. Natasha blushed happily. "I like him and all his family. Nowisten! You know that old Prince Nicholas much dislikes his son'sarrying. The old fellow's crotchety! Of course Prince Andrew is not ahild and can shift without him, but it's not nice to enter a familygainst a father's will. One wants to do it peacefully and lovingly.ou're a clever girl and you'll know how to manage. Be kind, and useour wits. Then all will be well."
	Natasha remained silent, from shyness Marya Dmitrievna supposed, buteally because she disliked anyone interfering in what touched herove of Prince Andrew, which seemed to her so apart from all humanffairs that no one could understand it. She loved and knew Princendrew, he loved her only, and was to come one of these days andake her. She wanted nothing more.
	"You see I have known him a long time and am also fond of Mary, youruture sister-in-law. 'Husbands' sisters bring up blisters,' buthis one wouldn't hurt a fly. She has asked me to bring you twoogether. Tomorrow you'll go with your father to see her. Be very nicend affectionate to her: you're younger than she. When he comes, he'llind you already know his sister and father and are liked by them.m I right or not? Won't that be best?"
	"Yes, it will," Natasha answered reluctantly.BK8|CH7
	CHAPTER VII
	Next day, by Marya Dmitrievna's advice, Count Rostov took Natasha toall on Prince Nicholas Bolkonski. The count did not set outheerfully on this visit, at heart he felt afraid. He wellemembered the last interview he had had with the old prince at theime of the enrollment, when in reply to an invitation to dinner head had to listen to an angry reprimand for not having provided hisull quota of men. Natasha, on the other hand, having put on herest gown, was in the highest spirits. "They can't help liking me,"he thought. "Everybody always has liked me, and I am so willing to donything they wish, so ready to be fond of him- for being hisather- and of her- for being his sister- that there is no reasonor them not to like me..."
	They drove up to the gloomy old house on the Vozdvizhenka andntered the vestibule.
	"Well, the Lord have mercy on us!" said the count, half in jest,alf in earnest; but Natasha noticed that her father was flurried onntering the anteroom and inquired timidly and softly whether therince and princess were at home.
	When they had been announced a perturbation was noticeable among theervants. The footman who had gone to announce them was stopped bynother in the large hall and they whispered to one another. Then aaidservant ran into the hall and hurriedly said something, mentioninghe princess. At last an old, cross looking footman came and announcedo the Rostovs that the prince was not receiving, but that therincess begged them to walk up. The first person who came to meet theisitors was Mademoiselle Bourienne. She greeted the father andaughter with special politeness and showed them to the princess'oom. The princess, looking excited and nervous, her face flushed inatches, ran in to meet the visitors, treading heavily, and vainlyrying to appear cordial and at ease. From the first glance Princessary did not like Natasha. She thought her too fashionably dressed,rivolously gay and vain. She did not at all realize that beforeaving seen her future sister-in-law she was prejudiced against her bynvoluntary envy of her beauty, youth, and happiness, as well as byealousy of her brother's love for her. Apart from this insuperablentipathy to her, Princess Mary was agitated just then because onhe Rostovs' being announced, the old prince had shouted that he didot wish to see them, that Princess Mary might do so if she chose, buthey were not to be admitted to him. She had decided to receivehem, but feared lest the prince might at any moment indulge in somereak, as he seemed much upset by the Rostovs' visit.
	"There, my dear princess, I've brought you my songstress," saidhe count, bowing and looking round uneasily as if afraid the oldrince might appear. "I am so glad you should get to know onenother... very sorry the prince is still ailing," and after a fewore commonplace remarks he rose. "If you'll allow me to leave myatasha in your hands for a quarter of an hour, Princess, I'll driveound to see Anna Semenovna, it's quite near in the Dogs' Square,nd then I'll come back for her."
	The count had devised this diplomatic ruse (as he afterwards toldis daughter) to give the future sisters-in-law an opportunity to talko one another freely, but another motive was to avoid the danger ofncountering the old prince, of whom he was afraid. He did not mentionhis to his daughter, but Natasha noticed her father's nervousness andnxiety and felt mortified by it. She blushed for him, grew stillngrier at having blushed, and looked at the princess with a boldnd defiant expression which said that she was not afraid ofnybody. The princess told the count that she would be delighted,nd only begged him to stay longer at Anna Semenovna's, and heeparted.
	Despite the uneasy glances thrown at her by Princess Mary- whoished to have a tete-a-tete with Natasha- Mademoiselle Bourienneemained in the room and persistently talked about Moscow amusementsnd theaters. Natasha felt offended by the hesitation she hadoticed in the anteroom, by her father's nervousness, and by thennatural manner of the princess who- she thought- was making aavor of receiving her, and so everything displeased her. She didot like Princess Mary, whom she thought very plain, affected, andry. Natasha suddenly shrank into herself and involuntarily assumed anffhand air which alienated Princess Mary still more. After fiveinutes of irksome, constrained conversation, they heard the soundf slippered feet rapidly approaching. Princess Mary lookedrightened.
	The door opened and the old prince, in a dress, ing gown and a whiteightcap, came in.
	"Ah, madam!" he began. "Madam, Countess... Countess Rostova, if I amot mistaken... I beg you to excuse me, to excuse me... I did notnow, madam. God is my witness, I did not know you had honored us with visit, and I came in such a costume only to see my daughter. I begou to excuse me... God is my witness, I didn't know-" he repeated,tressing the word "God" so unnaturally and so unpleasantly thatrincess Mary stood with downcast eyes not daring to look either ater father or at Natasha.
	Nor did the latter, having risen and curtsied, know what to do.ademoiselle Bourienne alone smiled agreeably.
	"I beg you to excuse me, excuse me! God is my witness, I did notnow," muttered the old man, and after looking Natasha over fromead to foot he went out.
	Mademoiselle Bourienne was the first to recover herself after thispparition and began speaking about the prince's indisposition.atasha and Princess Mary looked at one another in silence, and theonger they did so without saying what they wanted to say, the greaterrew their antipathy to one another.
	When the count returned, Natasha was impolitely pleased and hastenedo get away: at that moment she hated the stiff, elderly princess, whoould place her in such an embarrassing position and had spent half anour with her without once mentioning Prince Andrew. "I couldn't beginalking about him in the presence of that Frenchwoman," thoughtatasha. The same thought was meanwhile tormenting Princess Mary.he knew what she ought to have said to Natasha, but she had beennable to say it because Mademoiselle Bourienne was in the way, andecause, without knowing why, she felt it very difficult to speak ofhe marriage. When the count was already leaving the room, Princessary went up hurriedly to Natasha, took her by the hand, and said with deep sigh:
	"Wait, I must..."
	Natasha glanced at her ironically without knowing why.
	"Dear Natalie," said Princess Mary, "I want you to know that I amlad my brother has found happiness...."
	She paused, feeling that she was not telling the truth. Natashaoticed this and guessed its reason.
	"I think, Princess, it is not convenient to speak of that now,"he said with external dignity and coldness, though she felt the tearshoking her.
	"What have I said and what have I done?" thought she, as soon as sheas out of the room.
	They waited a long time for Natasha to come to dinner that day.he sat in her room crying like a child, blowing her nose and sobbing.onya stood beside her, kissing her hair.
	"Natasha, what is it about?" she asked. "What do they matter to you?t will all pass, Natasha."
	"But if you only knew how offensive it was... as if I..."
	"Don't talk about it, Natasha. It wasn't your fault so why shouldou mind? Kiss me," said Sonya.
	Natasha raised her head and, kissing her friend on the lips, presseder wet face against her.
	"I can't tell you, I don't know. No one's to blame," said Natasha-It's my fault. But it all hurts terribly. Oh, why doesn't heome?..."
	She came in to dinner with red eyes. Marya Dmitrievna, who knewow the prince had received the Rostovs, pretended not to notice howpset Natasha was and jested resolutely and loudly at table with theount and the other guests.BK8|CH8
	CHAPTER VIII
	That evening the Rostovs went to the Opera, for which Maryamitrievna had taken a box.
	Natasha did not want to go, but could not refuse Maryamitrievna's kind offer which was intended expressly for her. When sheame ready dressed into the ballroom to await her father, andooking in the large mirror there saw that she was pretty, veryretty, she felt even more sad, but it was a sweet, tender sadness.
	"O God, if he were here now I would not behave as I did then, butifferently. I would not be silly and afraid of things, I would simplymbrace him, cling to him, and make him look at me with thoseearching inquiring eyes with which he has so often looked at me,nd then I would make him laugh as he used to laugh. And his eyes- how see those eyes!" thought Natasha. "And what do his father and sisteratter to me? I love him alone, him, him, with that face and thoseyes, with his smile, manly and yet childlike.... No, I had better nothink of him; not think of him but forget him, quite forget him forhe present. I can't bear this waiting and I shall cry in a minute!"nd she turned away from the glass, making an effort not to cry.And how can Sonya love Nicholas so calmly and quietly and wait soong and so patiently?" thought she, looking at Sonya, who also camen quite ready, with a fan in her hand. "No, she's altogetherifferent. I can't!"
	Natasha at that moment felt so softened and tender that it was notnough for her to love and know she was beloved, she wanted now, atnce, to embrace the man she loved, to speak and hear from him wordsf love such as filled her heart. While she sat in the carriage besideer father, pensively watching the lights of the street lampslickering on the frozen window, she felt still sadder and more inove, and forgot where she was going and with whom. Having fallen intohe line of carriages, the Rostovs' carriage drove up to theheater, its wheels squeaking over the snow. Natasha and Sonya,olding up their dresses, jumped out quickly. The count got out helpedy the footmen, and, passing among men and women who were entering andhe program sellers, they all three went along the corridor to theirst row of boxes. Through the closed doors the music was alreadyudible.
	"Natasha, your hair!..." whispered Sonya.
	An attendant deferentially and quickly slipped before the ladies andpened the door of their box. The music sounded louder and through theoor rows of brightly lit boxes in which ladies sat with bare arms andhoulders, and noisy stalls brilliant with uniforms, glitteredefore their eyes. A lady entering the next box shot a glance ofeminine envy at Natasha. The curtain had not yet risen and theverture was being played. Natasha, smoothing her gown, went in withonya and sat down, scanning the brilliant tiers of boxes opposite. sensation she had not experienced for a long time- that ofundreds of eyes looking at her bare arms and neck- suddenlyffected her both agreeably and disagreeably and called up a wholerowd of memories, desires and emotions associated with that feeling.
	The two remarkably pretty girls, Natasha and Sonya, with Countostov who had not been seen in Moscow for a long time, attractedeneral attention. Moreover, everybody knew vaguely of Natasha'sngagement to Prince Andrew, and knew that the Rostovs had lived inhe country ever since, and all looked with curiosity at a fiancee whoas making one of the best matches in Russia.
	Natasha's looks, as everyone told her, had improved in theountry, and that evening thanks to her agitation she was particularlyretty. She struck those who saw her by her fullness of life andeauty, combined with her indifference to everything about her. Herlack eyes looked at the crowd without seeking anyone, and herelicate arm, bare to above the elbow, lay on the velvet edge of theox, while, evidently unconsciously, she opened and closed her hand inime to the music, crumpling her program. "Look, there's Alenina,"aid Sonya, "with her mother, isn't it?"
	"Dear me, Michael Kirilovich has grown still stouter!" remarkedhe count.
	"Look at our Anna Mikhaylovna- what a headdress she has on!"
	"The Karagins, Julie- and Boris with them. One can see at oncehat they're engaged...."
	"Drubetskoy has proposed?"
	"Oh yes, I heard it today," said Shinshin, coming into theostovs' box.
	Natasha looked in the direction in which her father's eyes wereurned and saw Julie sitting beside her mother with a happy look oner face and a string of pearls round her thick red neck- whichatasha knew was covered with powder. Behind them, wearing a smile andeaning over with an ear to Julie's mouth, was Boris' handsomemoothly brushed head. He looked the Rostovs from under his browsnd said something, smiling, to his betrothed.
	"They are talking about us, about me and him!" thought Natasha. "Ande no doubt is calming her jealousy of me. They needn't troublehemselves! If only they knew how little I am concerned about any ofhem."
	Behind them sat Anna Mikhaylovna wearing a green headdress andith a happy look of resignation to the will of God on her face. Theirox was pervaded by that atmosphere of an affianced couple whichatasha knew so well and liked so much. She turned away and suddenlyemembered all that had been so humiliating in her morning's visit.
	"What right has he not to wish to receive me into his family? Oh,etter not think of it- not till he comes back!" she told herself, andegan looking at the faces, some strange and some familiar, in thetalls. In the front, in the very center, leaning back against therchestra rail, stood Dolokhov in a Persian dress, his curly hairrushed up into a huge shock. He stood in full view of the audience,ell aware that he was attracting everyone's attention, yet as much atase as though he were in his own room. Around him thronged Moscow'sost brilliant young men, whom he evidently dominated.
	The count, laughing, nudged the blushing Sonya and pointed to herormer adorer.
	"Do you recognize him?" said he. "And where has he sprung from?"e asked, turning to Shinshin. "Didn't he vanish somewhere?"
	"He did," replied Shinshin. "He was in the Caucasus and ran awayrom there. They say he has been acting as minister to some rulingrince in Persia, where he killed the Shah's brother. Now all theoscow ladies are mad about him! It's 'Dolokhov the Persian' that doest! We never hear a word but Dolokhov is mentioned. They swear by him,hey offer him to you as they would a dish of choice sterlet. Dolokhovnd Anatole Kuragin have turned all our ladies' heads."
	A tall, beautiful woman with a mass of plaited hair and much exposedlump white shoulders and neck, round which she wore a double stringf large pearls, entered the adjoining box rustling her heavy silkress and took a long time settling into her place.
	Natasha involuntarily gazed at that neck, those shoulders, andearls and coiffure, and admired the beauty of the shoulders and theearls. While Natasha was fixing her gaze on her for the second timehe lady looked round and, meeting the count's eyes, nodded to him andmiled. She was the Countess Bezukhova, Pierre's wife, and theount, who knew everyone in society, leaned over and spoke to her.
	"Have you been here long, Countess?" he inquired. "I'll call, I'llall to kiss your hand. I'm here on business and have brought my girlsith me. They say Semenova acts marvelously. Count Pierre never usedo forget us. Is he here?"
	"Yes, he meant to look in," answered Helene, and glanced attentivelyt Natasha.
	Count Rostov resumed his seat.
	"Handsome, isn't she?" he whispered to Natasha.
	"Wonderful!" answered Natasha. "She's a woman one could easilyall in love with."
	Just then the last chords of the overture were heard and theonductor tapped with his stick. Some latecomers took their seats inhe stalls, and the curtain rose.
	As soon as it rose everyone in the boxes and stalls became silent,nd all the men, old and young, in uniform and evening dress, andll the women with gems on their bare flesh, turned their wholettention with eager curiosity to the stage. Natasha too began to lookt it.BK8|CH9
	CHAPTER IX
	The floor of the stage consisted of smooth boards, at the sidesas some painted cardboard representing trees, and at the back was aloth stretched over boards. In the center of the stage sat some girlsn red bodices and white skirts. One very fat girl in a white silkress sat apart on a low bench, to the back of which a piece ofreen cardboard was glued. They all sang something. When they hadinished their song the girl in white went up to the prompter's boxnd a man with tight silk trousers over his stout legs, and holding plume and a dagger, went up to her and began singing, waving hisrms about.
	First the man in the tight trousers sang alone, then she sang,hen they both paused while the orchestra played and the maningered the hand of the girl in white, obviously awaiting the beat totart singing with her. They sang together and everyone in the theateregan clapping and shouting, while the man and woman on the stage- whoepresented lovers- began smiling, spreading out their arms, andowing.
	After her life in the country, and in her present serious mood,ll this seemed grotesque and amazing to Natasha. She could not followhe opera nor even listen to the music; she saw only the paintedardboard and the queerly dressed men and women who moved, spoke,nd sang so strangely in that brilliant light. She knew what it wasll meant to represent, but it was so pretentiously false andnnatural that she first felt ashamed for the actors and then amusedt them. She looked at the faces of the audience, seeking in themhe same sense of ridicule and perplexity she herself experienced, buthey all seemed attentive to what was happening on the stage, andxpressed delight which to Natasha seemed feigned. "I suppose it haso be like this!" she thought. She kept looking round in turn at theows of pomaded heads in the stalls and then at the seminude womenn the boxes, especially at Helene in the next box, who- apparentlyuite unclothed- sat with a quiet tranquil smile, not taking heryes off the stage. And feeling the bright light that flooded thehole place and the warm air heated by the crowd, Natasha little byittle began to pass into a state of intoxication she had notxperienced for a long while. She did not realize who and where sheas, nor what was going on before her. As she looked and thought,he strangest fancies unexpectedly and disconnectedly passed througher mind: the idea occurred to her of jumping onto the edge of the boxnd singing the air the actress was singing, then she wished toouch with her fan an old gentleman sitting not far from her, theno lean over to Helene and tickle her.
	At a moment when all was quiet before the commencement of a song, door leading to the stalls on the side nearest the Rostovs' boxreaked, and the steps of a belated arrival were heard. "There'suragin!" whispered Shinshin. Countess Bezukhova turned smiling to theewcomer, and Natasha, following the direction of that look, saw anxceptionally handsome adjutant approaching their box with aelf-assured yet courteous bearing. This was Anatole Kuragin whomhe had seen and noticed long ago at the ball in Petersburg. He wasow in an adjutant's uniform with one epaulet and a shoulder knot.e moved with a restrained swagger which would have been ridiculousad he not been so good-looking and had his handsome face not wornuch an expression of good-humored complacency and gaiety. Thoughhe performance was proceeding, he walked deliberately down thearpeted gangway, his sword and spurs slightly jingling and hisandsome perfumed head held high. Having looked at Natasha hepproached his sister, laid his well gloved hand on the edge of herox, nodded to her, and leaning forward asked a question, with aotion toward Natasha.
	"Mais charmante!" said he, evidently referring to Natasha, who didot exactly hear his words but understood them from the movement ofis lips. Then he took his place in the first row of the stalls andat down beside Dolokhov, nudging with his elbow in a friendly andffhand way that Dolokhov whom others treated so fawningly. Heinked at him gaily, smiled, and rested his foot against the orchestracreen.
	"How like the brother is to the sister," remarked the count. "Andow handsome they both are!"
	Shinshin, lowering his voice, began to tell the count of somentrigue of Kuragin's in Moscow, and Natasha tried to overhear it justecause he had said she was "charmante."
	The first act was over. In the stalls everyone began moving about,oing out and coming in.
	Boris came to the Rostovs' box, received their congratulationsery simply, and raising his eyebrows with an absent-minded smileonveyed to Natasha and Sonya his fiancee's invitation to her wedding,nd went away. Natasha with a gay, coquettish smile talked to him, andongratulated on his approaching wedding that same Boris with whom shead formerly been in love. In the state of intoxication she was in,verything seemed simple and natural.
	The scantily clad Helene smiled at everyone in the same way, andatasha gave Boris a similar smile.
	Helene's box was filled and surrounded from the stalls by the mostistinguished and intellectual men, who seemed to vie with one anothern their wish to let everyone see that they knew her.
	During the whole of that entr'acte Kuragin stood with Dolokhov inront of the orchestra partition, looking at the Rostovs' box. Natashanew he was talking about her and this afforded her pleasure. She evenurned so that he should see her profile in what she thought was itsost becoming aspect. Before the beginning of the second act Pierreppeared in the stalls. The Rostovs had not seen him since theirrrival. His face looked sad, and he had grown still stouter sinceatasha last saw him. He passed up to the front rows, not noticingnyone. Anatole went up to him and began speaking to him, looking atnd indicating the Rostovs' box. On seeing Natasha Pierre grewnimated and, hastily passing between the rows, came toward their box.hen he got there he leaned on his elbows and, smiling, talked toer for a long time. While conversing with Pierre, Natasha heard aan's voice in Countess Bezukhova's box and something told her itas Kuragin. She turned and their eyes met. Almost smiling, he gazedtraight into her eyes with such an enraptured caressing look thatt seemed strange to be so near him, to look at him like that, to beo sure he admired her, and not to be acquainted with him.
	In the second act there was scenery representing tombstones, thereas a round hole in the canvas to represent the moon, shades wereaised over the footlights, and from horns and contrabass came deepotes while many people appeared from right and left wearing blackloaks and holding things like daggers in their hands. They beganaving their arms. Then some other people ran in and began draggingway the maiden who had been in white and was now in light blue.hey did not drag her away at once, but sang with her for a longime and then at last dragged her off, and behind the scenes somethingetallic was struck three times and everyone knelt down and sang arayer. All these things were repeatedly interrupted by thenthusiastic shouts of the audience.
	During this act every time Natasha looked toward the stalls sheaw Anatole Kuragin with an arm thrown across the back of his chair,taring at her. She was pleased to see that he was captivated by hernd it did not occur to her that there was anything wrong in it.
	When the second act was over Countess Bezukhova rose, turned tohe Rostovs' box- her whole bosom completely exposed- beckoned the oldount with a gloved finger, and paying no attention to those who hadntered her box began talking to him with an amiable smile.
	"Do make me acquainted with your charming daughters," said she. "Thehole town is singing their praises and I don't even know then!"
	Natasha rose and curtsied to the splendid countess. She was soleased by praise from this brilliant beauty that she blushed withleasure.
	"I want to become a Moscovite too, now," said Helene. "How is itou're not ashamed to bury such pearls in the country?"
	Countess Bezukhova quite deserved her reputation of being aascinating woman. She could say what she did not think- especiallyhat was flattering- quite simply and naturally.
	"Dear count, you must let me look after your daughters! Though Im not staying here long this time- nor are you- I will try to amusehem. I have already heard much of you in Petersburg and wanted to geto know you," said she to Natasha with her stereotyped and lovelymile. "I had heard about you from my page, Drubetskoy. Have you hearde is getting married? And also from my husband's friend Bolkonski,rince Andrew Bolkonski," she went on with special emphasis,mplying that she knew of his relation to Natasha. To get bettercquainted she asked that one of the young ladies should come into herox for the rest of the performance, and Natasha moved over to it.
	The scene of the third act represented a palace in which manyandles were burning and pictures of knights with short beards hung onhe walls. In the middle stood what were probably a king and aueen. The king waved his right arm and, evidently nervous, sangomething badly and sat down on a crimson throne. The maiden who hadeen first in white and then in light blue, now wore only a smock, andtood beside the throne with her hair down. She sang somethingournfully, addressing the queen, but the king waved his arm severely,nd men and women with bare legs came in from both sides and beganancing all together. Then the violins played very shrilly and merrilynd one of the women with thick bare legs and thin arms, separatingrom the others, went behind the wings, adjusted her bodice,eturned to the middle of the stage, and began jumping and strikingne foot rapidly against the other. In the stalls everyone clapped andhouted "bravo!" Then one of the men went into a corner of thetage. The cymbals and horns in the orchestra struck up more loudly,nd this man with bare legs jumped very high and waved his feetbout very rapidly. (He was Duport, who received sixty thousand rubles year for this art.) Everybody in the stalls, boxes, and galleriesegan clapping and shouting with all their might, and the mantopped and began smiling and bowing to all sides. Then other mennd women danced with bare legs. Then the king again shouted to theound of music, and they all began singing. But suddenly a stormame on, chromatic scales and diminished sevenths were heard in therchestra, everyone ran off, again dragging one of their numberway, and the curtain dropped. Once more there was a terrible noisend clatter among the audience, and with rapturous faces everyoneegan shouting: "Duport! Duport! Duport!" Natasha no longer thoughthis strange. She look about with pleasure, smiling joyfully.
	"Isn't Duport delightful?" Helene asked her.
	"Oh, yes," replied Natasha.BK8|CH10
	CHAPTER X
	During the entr'acte a whiff of cold air came into Helene's box, theoor opened, and Anatole entered, stooping and trying not to brushgainst anyone.
	"Let me introduce my brother to you," said Helene, her eyes shiftingneasily from Natasha to Anatole.
	Natasha turned her pretty little head toward the elegant youngfficer and smiled at him over her bare shoulder. Anatole, who wass handsome at close quarters as at a distance, sat down beside hernd told her he had long wished to have this happiness- ever since thearyshkins' ball in fact, at which he had had the well-rememberedleasure of seeing her. Kuragin was much more sensible and simple withomen than among men. He talked boldly and naturally, and Natashaas strangely and agreeably struck by the fact that there wasothing formidable in this man about whom there was so much talk,ut that on the contrary his smile was most naive, cheerful, andood-natured.
	Kuragin asked her opinion of the performance and told her how at arevious performance Semenova had fallen down on the stage.
	"And do you know, Countess," he said, suddenly addressing her asn old, familiar acquaintance, "we are getting up a costumeournament; you ought to take part in it! It will be great fun. Wehall all meet at the Karagins'! Please come! No! Really, eh?" saide.
	While saying this he never removed his smiling eyes from her face,er neck, and her bare arms. Natasha knew for certain that he wasnraptured by her. This pleased her, yet his presence made her feelonstrained and oppressed. When she was not looking at him she felthat he was looking at her shoulders, and she involuntarily caught hisye so that he should look into hers rather than this. But lookingnto his eyes she was frightened, realizing that there was not thatarrier of modesty she had always felt between herself and otheren. She did not know how it was that within five minutes she had comeo feel herself terribly near to this man. When she turned away sheeared he might seize her from behind by her bare arm and kiss hern the neck. They spoke of most ordinary things, yet she felt thathey were closer to one another than she had ever been to any man.atasha kept turning to Helene and to her father, as if asking what itll meant, but Helene was engaged in conversation with a general andid not answer her look, and her father's eyes said nothing but whathey always said: "Having a good time? Well, I'm glad of it!"
	During one of these moments of awkward silence when Anatole'srominent eyes were gazing calmly and fixedly at her, Natasha, toreak the silence, asked him how he liked Moscow. She asked theuestion and blushed. She felt all the time that by talking to him sheas doing something improper. Anatole smiled as though to encourageer.
	"At first I did not like it much, because what makes a town pleasante sont les jolies femmes,* isn't that so? But now I like it very muchndeed," he said, looking at her significantly. "You'll come to theostume tournament, Countess? Do come!" and putting out his hand toer bouquet and dropping his voice, he added, "You will be therettiest there. Do come, dear countess, and give me this flower as pledge!"
	*Are the pretty women.
	Natasha did not understand what he was saying any more than he didimself, but she felt that his incomprehensible words had anmproper intention. She did not know what to say and turned away as ifhe had not heard his remark. But as soon as she had turned away sheelt that he was there, behind, so close behind her.
	"How is he now? Confused? Angry? Ought I to put it right?" she askederself, and she could not refrain from turning round. She lookedtraight into his eyes, and his nearness, self-assurance, and theood-natured tenderness of his smile vanquished her. She smiled justs he was doing, gazing straight into his eyes. And again she feltith horror that no barrier lay between him and her.
	The curtain rose again. Anatole left the box, serene and gay.atasha went back to her father in the other box, now quite submissiveo the world she found herself in. All that was going on before herow seemed quite natural, but on the other hand all her previoushoughts of her betrothed, of Princess Mary, or of life in the countryid not once recur to her mind and were as if belonging to a remoteast.
	In the fourth act there was some sort of devil who sang waving hisrm about, till the boards were withdrawn from under him and heisappeared down below. That was the only part of the fourth acthat Natasha saw. She felt agitated and tormented, and the cause ofhis was Kuragin whom she could not help watching. As they wereeaving the theater Anatole came up to them, called their carriage,nd helped them in. As he was putting Natasha in he pressed her armbove the elbow. Agitated and flushed she turned round. He was lookingt her with glittering eyes, smiling tenderly.
	Only after she had reached home was Natasha able clearly to thinkver what had happened to her, and suddenly remembering Princendrew she was horrified, and at tea to which all had sat down afterhe opera, she gave a loud exclamation, flushed, and ran out of theoom.
	"O God! I am lost!" she said to herself. "How could I let him?"he sat for a long time hiding her flushed face in her hands trying toealize what had happened to her, but was unable either tonderstand what had happened or what she felt. Everything seemed dark,bscure, and terrible. There in that enormous, illuminated theaterhere the bare-legged Duport, in a tinsel-decorated jacket, jumpedbout to the music on wet boards, and young girls and old men, and theearly naked Helene with her proud, calm smile, rapturously criedbravo!"- there in the presence of that Helene it had all seemed clearnd simple; but now, alone by herself, it was incomprehensible.What is it? What was that terror I felt of him? What is thisnawing of conscience I am feeling now?" she thought.
	Only to the old countess at night in bed could Natasha have told allhe was feeling. She knew that Sonya with her severe and simpleiews would either not understand it at all or would be horrified atuch a confession. So Natasha tried to solve what was torturing her byerself.
	"Am I spoiled for Andrew's love or not?" she asked herself, and withoothing irony replied: "What a fool I am to ask that! What did happeno me? Nothing! I have done nothing, I didn't lead him on at all.obody will know and I shall never see him again," she told herself.So it is plain that nothing has happened and there is nothing toepent of, and Andrew can love me still. But why 'still?' O God, whysn't he here?" Natasha quieted herself for a moment, but again somenstinct told her that though all this was true, and though nothingad happened, yet the former purity of her love for Prince Andrewad perished. And again in imagination she went over her wholeonversation with Kuragin, and again saw the face, gestures, andender smile of that bold handsome man when he pressed her arm.BK8|CH11
	CHAPTER XI
	Anatole Kuragin was staying in Moscow because his father had sentim away from Petersburg, where he had been spending twenty thousandubles a year in cash, besides running up debts for as much more,hich his creditors demanded from his father.
	His father announced to him that he would now pay half his debts forhe last time, but only on condition that he went to Moscow asdjutant to the commander in chief- a post his father had procured forim- and would at last try to make a good match there. He indicated toim Princess Mary and Julie Karagina.
	Anatole consented and went to Moscow, where he put up at Pierre'souse. Pierre received him unwillingly at first, but got used to himfter a while, sometimes even accompanied him on his carousals, andave him money under the guise of loans.
	As Shinshin had remarked, from the time of his arrival Anatole hadurned the heads of the Moscow ladies, especially by the fact thate slighted them and plainly preferred the gypsy girls and Frenchctresses- with the chief of whom, Mademoiselle George, he was said toe on intimate relations. He had never missed a carousal atanilov's or other Moscow revelers', drank whole nights through,utvying everyone else, and was at all the balls and parties of theest society. There was talk of his intrigues with some of the ladies,nd he flirted with a few of them at the balls. But he did not runfter the unmarried girls, especially the rich heiresses who were mostf them plain. There was a special reason for this, as he had gotarried two years before- a fact known only to his most intimateriends. At that time while with his regiment in Poland, a Polishandowner of small means had forced him to marry his daughter. Anatolead very soon abandoned his wife and, for a payment which he agreed toend to his father-in-law, had arranged to be free to pass himself offs a bachelor.
	Anatole was always content with his position, with himself, and withthers. He was instinctively and thoroughly convinced that wasmpossible for him to live otherwise than as he did and that he hadever in his life done anything base. He was incapable ofonsidering how his actions might affect others or what theonsequences of this or that action of his might be. He wasonvinced that, as a duck is so made that it must live in water, sood had made him such that he must spend thirty thousand rubles a yearnd always occupy a prominent position in society. He believed this soirmly that others, looking at him, were persuaded of it too and didot refuse him either a leading place in society or money, which heorrowed from anyone and everyone and evidently would not repay.
	He was not a gambler, at any rate he did not care about winning.e was not vain. He did not mind what people thought of him. Stilless could he be accused of ambition. More than once he had vexedis father by spoiling his own career, and he laughed atistinctions of all kinds. He was not mean, and did not refusenyone who asked of him. All he cared about was gaiety and women,nd as according to his ideas there was nothing dishonorable inhese tastes, and he was incapable of considering what theratification of his tastes entailed for others, he honestlyonsidered himself irreproachable, sincerely despised rogues and badeople, and with a tranquil conscience carried his head high.
	Rakes, those male Magdalenes, have a secret feeling of innocenceimilar to that which female Magdalenes have, based on the same hopef forgiveness. "All will be forgiven her, for she loved much; and allill be forgiven him, for he enjoyed much."
	Dolokhov, who had reappeared that year in Moscow after his exile andis Persian adventures, and was leading a life of luxury, gambling,nd dissipation, associated with his old Petersburg comrade Kuraginnd made use of him for his own ends.
	Anatole was sincerely fond of Dolokhov for his cleverness andudacity. Dolokhov, who needed Anatole Kuragin's name, position, andonnections as a bait to draw rich young men into his gambling set,ade use of him and amused himself at his expense without lettinghe other feel it. Apart from the advantage he derived from Anatole,he very process of dominating another's will was in itself aleasure, a habit, and a necessity to Dolokhov.
	Natasha had made a strong impression on Kuragin. At supper after thepera he described to Dolokhov with the air of a connoisseur thettractions of her arms, shoulders, feet, and hair and expressed hisntention of making love to her. Anatole had no notion and wasncapable of considering what might come of such love-making, as heever had any notion of the outcome of any of his actions.
	"She's first-rate, my dear fellow, but not for us," repliedolokhov.
	"I will tell my sister to ask her to dinner," said Anatole. "Eh?"
	"You'd better wait till she's married...."
	"You know, I adore little girls, they lose their heads at once,"ursued Anatole.
	"You have been caught once already by a 'little girl,'" saidolokhov who knew of Kuragin's marriage. "Take care!"
	"Well, that can't happen twice! Eh?" said Anatole, with aood-humored laugh.BK8|CH12
	CHAPTER XII
	The day after the opera the Rostovs went nowhere and nobody cameo see them. Marya Dmitrievna talked to the count about somethinghich they concealed from Natasha. Natasha guessed they were talkingbout the old prince and planning something, and this disquieted andffended her. She was expecting Prince Andrew any moment and twicehat day sent a manservant to the Vozdvizhenka to ascertain whether head come. He had not arrived. She suffered more now than during herirst days in Moscow. To her impatience and pining for him were nowdded the unpleasant recollection of her interview with Princessary and the old prince, and a fear and anxiety of which she did notnderstand the cause. She continually fancied that either he wouldever come or that something would happen to her before he came. Sheould no longer think of him by herself calmly and continuously as shead done before. As soon as she began to think of him, theecollection of the old prince, of Princess Mary, of the theater,nd of Kuragin mingled with her thoughts. The question again presentedtself whether she was not guilty, whether she had not alreadyroken faith with Prince Andrew, and again she found herself recallingo the minutest detail every word, every gesture, and every shade inhe play of expression on the face of the man who had been able torouse in her such an incomprehensible and terrifying feeling. Tohe family Natasha seemed livelier than usual, but she was far lessranquil and happy than before.
	On Sunday morning Marya Dmitrievna invited her visitors to Mass ater parish church- the Church of the Assumption built over theraves of victims of the plague.
	"I don't like those fashionable churches," she said, evidentlyriding herself on her independence of thought. "God is the same everyhere. We have an excellent priest, he conducts the service decentlynd with dignity, and the deacon is the same. What holiness is theren giving concerts in the choir? I don't like it, it's justelf-indulgence!"
	Marya Dmitrievna liked Sundays and knew how to keep them. Herhole house was scrubbed and cleaned on Saturdays; neither she nor theervants worked, and they all wore holiday dress and went to church.t her table there were extra dishes at dinner, and the servants hadodka and roast goose or suckling pig. But in nothing in the house washe holiday so noticeable as in Marya Dmitrievna's broad, sternace, which on that day wore an invariable look of solemn festivity.
	After Mass, when they had finished their coffee in the dining roomhere the loose covers had been removed from the furniture, aervant announced that the carriage was ready, and Marya Dmitrievnaose with a stern air. She wore her holiday shawl, in which she paidalls, and announced that she was going to see Prince Nicholasolkonski to have an explanation with him about Natasha.
	After she had gone, a dressmaker from Madame Suppert-Roguet waitedn the Rostovs, and Natasha, very glad of this diversion, havinghut herself into a room adjoining the drawing room, occupiederself trying on the new dresses. Just as she had put on a bodiceithout sleeves and only tacked together, and was turning her heado see in the glass how the back fitted, she heard in the drawing roomhe animated sounds of her father's voice and another's- a woman's-hat made her flush. It was Helene. Natasha had not time to take offhe bodice before the door opened and Countess Bezukhova, dressed in aurple velvet gown with a high collar, came into the room beaming withood-humored amiable smiles.
	"Oh, my enchantress!" she cried to the blushing Natasha.Charming! No, this is really beyond anything, my dear count," saidhe to Count Rostov who had followed her in. "How can you live inoscow and go nowhere? No, I won't let you off! Mademoiselle Georgeill recite at my house tonight and there'll be some people, and ifou don't bring your lovely girls- who are prettier thanademoiselle George- I won't know you! My husband is away in Tver or Iould send him to fetch you. You must come. You positively must!etween eight and nine."
	She nodded to the dressmaker, whom she knew and who had curtsiedespectfully to her, and seated herself in an armchair beside theooking glass, draping the folds of her velvet dress picturesquely.he did not cease chattering good-naturedly and gaily, continuallyraising Natasha's beauty. She looked at Natasha's dresses and praisedhem, as well as a new dress of her own made of "metallic gauze,"hich she had received from Paris, and advised Natasha to have oneike it.
	"But anything suits you, my charmer!" she remarked.
	A smile of pleasure never left Natasha's face. She felt happy and asf she were blossoming under the praise of this dear Countessezukhova who had formerly seemed to her so unapproachable andmportant and was now so kind to her. Natasha brightened up and feltlmost in love with this woman, who was so beautiful and so kind.elene for her part was sincerely delighted with Natasha and wished toive her a good time. Anatole had asked her to bring him and Natashaogether, and she was calling on the Rostovs for that purpose. Thedea of throwing her brother and Natasha together amused her.
	Though at one time, in Petersburg, she had been annoyed with Natashaor drawing Boris away, she did not think of that now, and in herwn way heartily wished Natasha well. As she was leaving the Rostovshe called her protegee aside.
	"My brother dined with me yesterday- we nearly died of laughter-e ate nothing and kept sighing for you, my charmer! He is madly,uite madly, in love with you, my dear."
	Natasha blushed scarlet when she heard this.
	"How she blushes, how she blushes, my pretty!" said Helene. "Youust certainly come. If you love somebody, my charmer, that is not aeason to shut yourself up. Even if you are engaged, I am sure youriance would wish you to go into society rather than be bored toeath."
	"So she knows I am engaged, and she and her husband Pierre- thatood Pierre- have talked and laughed about this. So it's all right."nd again, under Helene's influence, what had seemed terrible noweemed simple and natural. "And she is such a grande dame, so kind,nd evidently likes me so much. And why not enjoy myself?" thoughtatasha, gazing at Helene with wide-open, wondering eyes.
	Marya Dmitrievna came back to dinner taciturn and serious, havingvidently suffered a defeat at the old prince's. She was still toogitated by the encounter to be able to talk of the affair calmly.n answer to the count's inquiries she replied that things were allight and that she would tell about it next day. On hearing ofountess Bezukhova's visit and the invitation for that evening,arya Dmitrievna remarked:
	"I don't care to have anything to do with Bezukhova and don't adviseou to; however, if you've promised- go. It will divert yourhoughts," she added, addressing Natasha.BK8|CH13
	CHAPTER XIII
	Count Rostov took the girls to Countess Bezukhova's. There were aood many people there, but nearly all strangers to Natasha. Countostov was displeased to see that the company consisted almostntirely of men and women known for the freedom of their conduct.ademoiselle George was standing in a corner of the drawing roomurrounded by young men. There were several Frenchmen present, amonghem Metivier who from the time Helene reached Moscow had been anntimate in her house. The count decided not to sit down to cards oret his girls out of his sight and to get away as soon as Mademoiselleeorge's performance was over.
	Anatole was at the door, evidently on the lookout for the Rostovs.mmediately after greeting the count he went up to Natasha andollowed her. As soon as she saw him she was seized by the sameeeling she had had at the opera- gratified vanity at his admirationf her and fear at the absence of a moral barrier between them.
	Helene welcomed Natasha delightedly and was loud in admiration ofer beauty and her dress. Soon after their arrival Mademoiselle Georgeent out of the room to change her costume. In the drawing room peopleegan arranging the chairs and taking their seats. Anatole moved ahair for Natasha and was about to sit down beside her, but the count,ho never lost sight of her, took the seat himself. Anatole sat downehind her.
	Mademoiselle George, with her bare, fat, dimpled arms, and a redhawl draped over one shoulder, came into the space left vacant forer, and assumed an unnatural pose. Enthusiastic whispering wasudible.
	Mademoiselle George looked sternly and gloomily at the audiencend began reciting some French verses describing her guilty love forer son. In some places she raised her voice, in others she whispered,ifting her head triumphantly; sometimes she paused and uttered hoarseounds, rolling her eyes.
	"Adorable! divine! delicious!" was heard from every side.
	Natasha looked at the fat actress, but neither saw nor heard nornderstood anything of what went on before her. She only felterself again completely borne away into this strange senseless world-o remote from her old world- a world in which it was impossible tonow what was good or bad, reasonable or senseless. Behind her satnatole, and conscious of his proximity she experienced a frightenedense of expectancy.
	After the first monologue the whole company rose and surroundedademoiselle George, expressing their enthusiasm.
	"How beautiful she is!" Natasha remarked to her father who hadlso risen and was moving through the crowd toward the actress.
	"I don't think so when I look at you!" said Anatole, followingatasha. He said this at a moment when she alone could hear him.You are enchanting... from the moment I saw you I have nevereased..."
	"Come, come, Natasha!" said the count, as he turned back for hisaughter. "How beautiful she is!" Natasha without saying anythingtepped up to her father and looked at him with surprised inquiringyes.
	After giving several recitations, Mademoiselle George left, andountess Bezukhova asked her visitors into the ballroom.
	The count wished to go home, but Helene entreated him not to spoiler improvised ball, and the Rostovs stayed on. Anatole askedatasha for a valse and as they danced he pressed her waist and handnd told her she was bewitching and that he loved her. During thecossaise, which she also danced with him, Anatole said nothing whenhey happened to be by themselves, but merely gazed at her. Natashaifted her frightened eyes to him, but there was such confidentenderness in his affectionate look and smile that she could not,hilst looking at him, say what she had to say. She lowered her eyes.
	"Don't say such things to me. I am betrothed and love another,"he said rapidly.... She glanced at him.
	Anatole was not upset or pained by what she had said.
	"Don't speak to me of that! What can I do?" said he. "I tell you Im madly, madly, in love with you! Is it my fault that you arenchanting?... It's our turn to begin."
	Natasha, animated and excited, looked about her with wide-openrightened eyes and seemed merrier than usual. She understood hardlynything that went on that evening. They danced the ecossaise andhe Grossvater. Her father asked her to come home, but she begged toemain. Wherever she went and whomever she was speaking to, she feltis eyes upon her. Later on she recalled how she had asked herather to let her go to the dressing room to rearrange her dress, thatelene had followed her and spoken laughingly of her brother's love,nd that she again met Anatole in the little sitting room. Helenead disappeared leaving them alone, and Anatole had taken her hand andaid in a tender voice:
	"I cannot come to visit you but is it possible that I shall neveree you? I love you madly. Can I never...?" and, blocking her path, herought his face close to hers.
	His large, glittering, masculine eyes were so close to hers that sheaw nothing but them.
	"Natalie?" he whispered inquiringly while she felt her hands beingainfully pressed. "Natalie?"
	"I don't understand. I have nothing to say," her eyes replied.
	Burning lips were pressed to hers, and at the same instant sheelt herself released, and Helene's footsteps and the rustle of herress were heard in the room. Natasha looked round at her, and then,ed and trembling, threw a frightened look of inquiry at Anatole andoved toward the door.
	"One word, just one, for God's sake!" cried Anatole.
	She paused. She so wanted a word from him that would explain toer what had happened and to which she could find no answer.
	"Natalie, just a word, only one!" he kept repeating, evidently notnowing what to say and he repeated it till Helene came up to them.
	Helene returned with Natasha to the drawing room. The Rostovs wentway without staying for supper.
	After reaching home Natasha did not sleep all night. She wasormented by the insoluble question whether she loved Anatole orrince Andrew. She loved Prince Andrew- she remembered distinctlyow deeply she loved him. But she also loved Anatole, of that thereas no doubt. "Else how could all this have happened?" thought she.If, after that, I could return his smile when saying good-by, if Ias able to let it come to that, it means that I loved him from theirst. It means that he is kind, noble, and splendid, and I couldot help loving him. What am I to do if I love him and the other oneoo?" she asked herself, unable to find an answer to these terribleuestions.BK8|CH14
	CHAPTER XIV
	Morning came with its cares and bustle. Everyone got up and began toove about and talk, dressmakers came again. Marya Dmitrievnappeared, and they were called to breakfast. Natasha kept lookingneasily at everybody with wide-open eyes, as if wishing tontercept every glance directed toward her, and tried to appear theame as usual.
	After breakfast, which was her best time, Marya Dmitrievna satown in her armchair and called Natasha and the count to her.
	"Well, friends, I have now thought the whole matter over and this isy advice," she began. "Yesterday, as you know, I went to see Princeolkonski. Well, I had a talk with him.... He took it into his head toegin shouting, but I am not one to be shouted down. I said what I hado say!"
	"Well, and he?" asked the count.
	"He? He's crazy... he did not want to listen. But what's the usef talking? As it is we have worn the poor girl out," said Maryamitrievna. "My advice to you is finish your business and go back homeo Otradnoe... and wait there."
	"Oh, no!" exclaimed Natasha.
	"Yes, go back," said Marya Dmitrievna, "and wait there. If youretrothed comes here now- there will be no avoiding a quarrel; butlone with the old man he will talk things over and then come on toou."
	Count Rostov approved of this suggestion, appreciating itseasonableness. If the old man came round it would be all the bettero visit him in Moscow or at Bald Hills later on; and if not, theedding, against his wishes, could only be arranged at Otradnoe.
	"That is perfectly true. And I am sorry I went to see him and tooker," said the old count.
	"No, why be sorry? Being here, you had to pay your respects. Butf he won't- that's his affair," said Marya Dmitrievna, looking foromething in her reticule. "Besides, the trousseau is ready, sohere is nothing to wait for; and what is not ready I'll send afterou. Though I don't like letting you go, it is the best way. So go,ith God's blessing!"
	Having found what she was looking for in the reticule she handedt to Natasha. It was a letter from Princess Mary.
	"She has written to you. How she torments herself, poor thing! She'sfraid you might think that she does not like you."
	"But she doesn't like me," said Natasha.
	"Don't talk nonsense!" cried Marya Dmitrievna.
	"I shan't believe anyone, I know she doesn't like me," repliedatasha boldly as she took the letter, and her face expressed a coldnd angry resolution that caused Marya Dmitrievna to look at herore intently and to frown.
	"Don't answer like that, my good girl!" she said. "What I say isrue! Write an answer!" Natasha did not reply and went to her own roomo read Princess Mary's letter.
	Princess Mary wrote that she was in despair at theisunderstanding that had occurred between them. Whatever her father'seelings might be, she begged Natasha to believe that she could notelp loving her as the one chosen by her brother, for whoseappiness she was ready to sacrifice everything.
	"Do not think, however," she wrote, "that my father isll-disposed toward you. He is an invalid and an old man who must beorgiven; but he is good and magnanimous and will love her who makesis son happy." Princess Mary went on to ask Natasha to fix a timehen she could see her again.
	After reading the letter Natasha sat down at the writing table tonswer it. "Dear Princess," she wrote in French quickly andechanically, and then paused. What more could she write after allhat had happened the evening before? "Yes, yes! All that hasappened, and now all is changed," she thought as she sat with theetter she had begun before her. "Must I break off with him? Must Ieally? That's awful... and to escape from these dreadful thoughts sheent to Sonya and began sorting patterns with her.
	After dinner Natasha went to her room and again took up Princessary's letter. "Can it be that it is all over?" she thought. "Can ite that all this has happened so quickly and has destroyed all thatent before?" She recalled her love for Prince Andrew in all itsormer strength, and at the same time felt that she loved Kuragin. Sheividly pictured herself as Prince Andrew's wife, and the scenes ofappiness with him she had so often repeated in her imagination, andt the same time, aglow with excitement, recalled every detail ofesterday's interview with Anatole.
	"Why could that not be as well?" she sometimes asked herself inomplete bewilderment. "Only so could I be completely happy; but now Iave to choose, and I can't be happy without either of them. Only,"he thought, "to tell Prince Andrew what has happened or to hide itrom him are both equally impossible. But with that one nothing ispoiled. But am I really to abandon forever the joy of Prince Andrew'sove, in which I have lived so long?"
	"Please, Miss!" whispered a maid entering the room with a mysteriousir. "A man told me to give you this-" and she handed Natasha aetter.
	"Only, for Christ's sake..." the girl went on, as Natasha, withouthinking, mechanically broke the seal and read a love letter fromnatole, of which, without taking in a word, she understood onlyhat it was a letter from him- from the man she loved. Yes, sheoved him, or else how could that have happened which had happened?nd how could she have a love letter from him in her hand?
	With trembling hands Natasha held that passionate love letterhich Dolokhov had composed for Anatole, and as she read it sheound in it an echo of all that she herself imagined she was feeling.
	"Since yesterday evening my fate has been sealed; to be loved by your to die. There is no other way for me," the letter began. Then heent on to say that he knew her parents would not give her to him- forhis there were secret reasons he could reveal only to her- but thatf she loved him she need only say the word yes, and no human powerould hinder their bliss. Love would conquer all. He would steal herway and carry her off to the ends of the earth.
	"Yes, yes! I love him!" thought Natasha, reading the letter forhe twentieth time and finding some peculiarly deep meaning in eachord of it.
	That evening Marya Dmitrievna was going to the Akharovs' androposed to take the girls with her. Natasha, pleading a headache,emained at home.BK8|CH15
	CHAPTER XV
	On returning late in the evening Sonya went to Natasha's room, ando her surprise found her still dressed and asleep on the sofa. Openn the table, beside her lay Anatole's letter. Sonya picked it upnd read it.
	As she read she glanced at the sleeping Natasha, trying to find iner face an explanation of what she was reading, but did not findt. Her face was calm, gentle, and happy. Clutching her breast to keeperself from choking, Sonya, pale and trembling with fear andgitation, sat down in an armchair and burst into tears.
	"How was it I noticed nothing? How could it go so far? Can sheave left off loving Prince Andrew? And how could she let Kuragin goo such lengths? He is a deceiver and a villain, that's plain! Whatill Nicholas, dear noble Nicholas, do when he hears of it? So this ishe meaning of her excited, resolute, unnatural look the day beforeesterday, yesterday, and today," thought Sonya. "But it can't be thathe loves him! She probably opened the letter without knowing who itas from. Probably she is offended by it. She could not do such ahing!"
	Sonya wiped away her tears and went up to Natasha, again scanninger face.
	"Natasha!" she said, just audibly.
	Natasha awoke and saw Sonya.
	"Ah, you're back?"
	And with the decision and tenderness that often come at the momentf awakening, she embraced her friend, but noticing Sonya's look ofmbarrassment, her own face expressed confusion and suspicion.
	"Sonya, you've read that letter?" she demanded.
	"Yes," answered Sonya softly.
	Natasha smiled rapturously.
	"No, Sonya, I can't any longer!" she said. "I can't hide it from youny longer. You know, we love one another! Sonya, darling, herites... Sonya..."
	Sonya stared open-eyed at Natasha, unable to believe her ears.
	"And Bolkonski?" she asked.
	"Ah, Sonya, if you only knew how happy I am!" cried Natasha. "Youon't know what love is...."
	"But, Natasha, can that be all over?"
	Natasha looked at Sonya with wide-open eyes as if she could notrasp the question.
	"Well, then, are you refusing Prince Andrew?" said Sonya.
	"Oh, you don't understand anything! Don't talk nonsense, justisten!" said Natasha, with momentary vexation.
	"But I can't believe it," insisted Sonya. "I don't understand. Hows it you have loved a man for a whole year and suddenly... Why, youave only seen him three times! Natasha, I don't believe you, you'reoking! In three days to forget everything and so..."
	"Three days?" said Natasha. "It seems to me I've loved him a hundredears. It seems to me that I have never loved anyone before. You can'tnderstand it.... Sonya, wait a bit, sit here," and Natasha embracednd kissed her.
	"I had heard that it happens like this, and you must have heard itoo, but it's only now that I feel such love. It's not the same asefore. As soon as I saw him I felt he was my master and I hislave, and that I could not help loving him. Yes, his slave!hatever he orders I shall do. You don't understand that. What can Io? What can I do, Sonya?" cried Natasha with a happy yet frightenedxpression.
	"But think what you are doing," cried Sonya. "I can't leave itike this. This secret correspondence... How could you let him go soar?" she went on, with a horror and disgust she could hardly conceal.
	"I told you that I have no will," Natasha replied. "Why can't younderstand? I love him!"
	"Then I won't let it come to that... I shall tell!" cried Sonya,ursting into tears.
	"What do you mean? For God's sake... If you tell, you are my enemy!"eclared Natasha. "You want me to be miserable, you want us to beeparated...."
	When she saw Natasha's fright, Sonya shed tears of shame and pityor her friend.
	"But what has happened between you?" she asked. "What has he said toou? Why doesn't he come to the house?"
	Natasha did not answer her questions.
	"For God's sake, Sonya, don't tell anyone, don't torture me,"atasha entreated. "Remember no one ought to interfere in suchatters! I have confided in you...."
	"But why this secrecy? Why doesn't he come to the house?" askedonya. "Why doesn't he openly ask for your hand? You know Princendrew gave you complete freedom- if it is really so; but I don'telieve it! Natasha, have you considered what these secret reasons cane?"
	Natasha looked at Sonya with astonishment. Evidently this questionresented itself to her mind for the first time and she did not knowow to answer it.
	"I don't know what the reasons are. But there must be reasons!"
	Sonya sighed and shook her head incredulously.
	"If there were reasons..." she began.
	But Natasha, guessing her doubts, interrupted her in alarm.
	"Sonya, one can't doubt him! One can't, one can't! Don't younderstand?" she cried.
	"Does he love you?"
	"Does he love me?" Natasha repeated with a smile of pity at herriend's lack of comprehension. "Why, you have read his letter and youave seen him."
	"But if he is dishonorable?"
	"He! dishonorable? If you only knew!" exclaimed Natasha.
	"If he is an honorable man he should either declare his intentionsr cease seeing you; and if you won't do this, I will. I will write toim, and I will tell Papa!" said Sonya resolutely.
	"But I can't live without him!" cried Natasha.
	"Natasha, I don't understand you. And what are you saying! Thinkf your father and of Nicholas."
	"I don't want anyone, I don't love anyone but him. How dare youay he is dishonorable? Don't you know that I love him?" screamedatasha. "Go away, Sonya! I don't want to quarrel with you, but go,or God's sake go! You see how I am suffering!" Natasha cried angrily,n a voice of despair and repressed irritation. Sonya burst intoobs and ran from the room.
	Natasha went to the table and without a moment's reflection wrotehat answer to Princess Mary which she had been unable to write allhe morning. In this letter she said briefly that all theirisunderstandings were at an end; that availing herself of theagnanimity of Prince Andrew who when he went abroad had given her herhe begged Princess Mary to forget everything and forgive her if shead been to blame toward her, but that she could not be his wife. Athat moment this all seemed quite easy, simple, and clear to Natasha.
	On Friday the Rostovs were to return to the country, but onednesday the count went with the prospective purchaser to hisstate near Moscow.
	On the day the count left, Sonya and Natasha were invited to a biginner party at the Karagins', and Marya Dmitrievna took them there.t that party Natasha again met Anatole, and Sonya noticed that shepoke to him, trying not to be overheard, and that all throughinner she was more agitated than ever. When they got home Natasha washe first to begin the explanation Sonya expected.
	"There, Sonya, you were talking all sorts of nonsense about him,"atasha began in a mild voice such as children use when they wish toe praised. "We have had an explanation today."
	"Well, what happened? What did he say? Natasha, how glad I am you'reot angry with me! Tell me everything- the whole truth. What did heay?"
	Natasha became thoughtful.
	"Oh, Sonya, if you knew him as I do! He said... He asked me what Iad promised Bolkonski. He was glad I was free to refuse him."
	Sonya sighed sorrowfully.
	"But you haven't refused Bolkonski?" said she.
	"Perhaps I have. Perhaps all is over between me and Bolkonski. Whyo you think so badly of me?"
	"I don't think anything, only I don't understand this..."
	"Wait a bit, Sonya, you'll understand everything. You'll see what man he is! Now don't think badly of me or of him. I don't thinkadly of anyone: I love and pity everybody. But what am I to do?"
	Sonya did not succumb to the tender tone Natasha used toward her.he more emotional and ingratiating the expression of Natasha's faceecame, the more serious and stern grew Sonya's.
	"Natasha," said she, "you asked me not to speak to you, and Iaven't spoken, but now you yourself have begun. I don't trust him,atasha. Why this secrecy?"
	"Again, again!" interrupted Natasha.
	"Natasha, I am afraid for you!"
	"Afraid of what?"
	"I am afraid you're going to your ruin," said Sonya resolutely,nd was herself horrified at what she had said.
	Anger again showed in Natasha's face.
	"And I'll go to my ruin, I will, as soon as possible! It's notour business! It won't be you, but I, who'll suffer. Leave melone, leave me alone! I hate you!"
	Natasha!" moaned Sonya, aghast.
	"I hate you, I hate you! You're my enemy forever!" And Natasha ranut of the room.
	Natasha did not speak to Sonya again and avoided her. With theame expression of agitated surprise and guilt she went about theouse, taking up now one occupation, now another, and at oncebandoning them.
	Hard as it was for Sonya, she watched her friend and did not let herut of her sight.
	The day before the count was to return, Sonya noticed that Natashaat by the drawingroom window all the morning as if expectingomething and that she made a sign to an officer who drove past,hom Sonya took to be Anatole.
	Sonya began watching her friend still more attentively and noticedhat at dinner and all that evening Natasha was in a strange andnnatural state. She answered questions at random, began sentences sheid not finish, and laughed at everything.
	After tea Sonya noticed a housemaid at Natasha's door timidlyaiting to let her pass. She let the girl go in, and then listening athe door learned that another letter had been delivered.
	Then suddenly it became clear to Sonya that Natasha had somereadful plan for that evening. Sonya knocked at her door. Natasha didot let her in.
	"She will run away with him!" thought Sonya. "She is capable ofnything. There was something particularly pathetic and resolute iner face today. She cried as she said good-by to Uncle," Sonyaemembered. "Yes, that's it, she means to elope with him, but whatm I to do?" thought she, recalling all the signs that clearlyndicated that Natasha had some terrible intention. "The count isway. What am I to do? Write to Kuragin demanding an explanation?ut what is there to oblige him to reply? Write to Pierre, as Princendrew asked me to in case of some misfortune?... But perhaps sheeally has already refused Bolkonski- she sent a letter to Princessary yesterday. And Uncle is away...." To tell Marya Dmitrievna whoad such faith in Natasha seemed to Sonya terrible. "Well, anyway,"hought Sonya as she stood in the dark passage, "now or never I mustrove that I remember the family's goodness to me and that I loveicholas. Yes! If I don't sleep for three nights I'll not leave thisassage and will hold her back by force and will and not let theamily be disgraced," thought she.BK8|CH16
	CHAPTER XVI
	Anatole had lately moved to Dolokhov's. The plan for Natalieostova's abduction had been arranged and the preparations made byolokhov a few days before, and on the day that Sonya, after listeningt Natasha's door, resolved to safeguard her, it was to have beenut into execution. Natasha had promised to come out to Kuragin at theack porch at ten that evening. Kuragin was to put her into a troykae would have ready and to drive her forty miles to the village ofamenka, where an unfrocked priest was in readiness to perform aarriage ceremony over them. At Kamenka a relay of horses was toait which would take them to the Warsaw highroad, and from there theyould hasten abroad with post horses.
	Anatole had a passport, an order for post horses, ten thousandubles he had taken from his sister and another ten thousandorrowed with Dolokhov's help.
	Two witnesses for the mock marriage- Khvostikov, a retired pettyfficial whom Dolokhov made use of in his gambling transactions, andakarin, a retired hussar, a kindly, weak fellow who had annbounded affection for Kuragin- were sitting at tea in Dolokhov'sront room.
	In his large study, the walls of which were hung to the ceiling withersian rugs, bearskins, and weapons, sat Dolokhov in a travelingloak and high boots, at an open desk on which lay abacus and someundles of paper money. Anatole, with uniform unbuttoned, walked tond fro from the room where the witnesses were sitting, through thetudy to the room behind, where his French valet and others wereacking the last of his things. Dolokhov was counting the money andoting something down.
	"Well," he said, "Khvostikov must have two thousand."
	"Give it to him, then," said Anatole.
	"Makarka" (their name for Makarin) "will go through fire and wateror you for nothing. So here are our accounts all settled," saidolokhov, showing him the memorandum. "Is that right?"
	"Yes, of course," returned Anatole, evidently not listening toolokhov and looking straight before him with a smile that did noteave his face.
	Dolokhov banged down the or of his and turned to Anatole with anronic smile:
	"Do you know? You'd really better drop it all. There's still time!"
	"Fool," retorted Anatole. "Don't talk nonsense! If you onlynew... it's the devil knows what!"
	"No, really, give it up!" said Dolokhov. "I am speaking seriously.t's no joke, this plot you've hatched."
	"What, teasing again? Go to the devil! Eh?" said Anatole, making arimace. "Really it's no time for your stupid jokes," and he lefthe room.
	Dolokhov smiled contemptuously and condescendingly when Anatolead gone out.
	"You wait a bit," he called after him. "I'm not joking, I'malking sense. Come here, come here!"
	Anatole returned and looked at Dolokhov, trying to give him histtention and evidently submitting to him involuntarily.
	"Now listen to me. I'm telling you this for the last time. Whyhould I joke about it? Did I hinder you? Who arranged everythingor you? Who found the priest and got the passport? Who raised theoney? I did it all."
	"Well, thank you for it. Do you think I am not grateful?" Andnatole sighed and embraced Dolokhov.
	"I helped you, but all the same I must tell you the truth; it is aangerous business, and if you think about it- a stupid business.ell, you'll carry her off- all right! Will they let it stop athat? It will come out that you're already married. Why, they'llave you in the criminal court...."
	"Oh, nonsense, nonsense!" Anatole ejaculated and again made arimace. "Didn't I explain to you? What?" And Anatole, with theartiality dull-witted people have for any conclusion they haveeached by their own reasoning, repeated the argument he had alreadyut to Dolokhov a hundred times. "Didn't I explain to you that Iave come to this conclusion: if this marriage is invalid," he wentn, crooking one finger, "then I have nothing to answer for; but if its valid, no matter! Abroad no one will know anything about it.sn't that so? And don't talk to me, don't, don't."
	"Seriously, you'd better drop it! You'll only get yourself into aess!"
	"Go to the devil!" cried Anatole and, clutching his hair, left theoom, but returned at once and dropped into an armchair in front ofolokhov with his feet turned under him. "It's the very devil! What?eel how it beats!" He took Dolokhov's hand and put it on his heart.What a foot, my dear fellow! What a glance! A goddess!" he added inrench. "What?"
	Dolokhov with a cold smile and a gleam in his handsome insolent eyesooked at him- evidently wishing to get some more amusement out ofim.
	"Well and when the money's gone, what then?"
	"What then? Eh?" repeated Anatole, sincerely perplexed by ahought of the future. "What then?... Then, I don't know.... But whyalk nonsense!" He glanced at his watch. "It's time!"
	Anatole went into the back room.
	"Now then! Nearly ready? You're dawdling!" he shouted to theervants.
	Dolokhov put away the money, called a footman whom he ordered toring something for them to eat and drink before the journey, and wentnto the room where Khvostikov and Makarin were sitting.
	Anatole lay on the sofa in the study leaning on his elbow andmiling pensively, while his handsome lips muttered tenderly toimself.
	"Come and eat something. Have a drink!" Dolokhov shouted to him fromhe other room.
	"I don't want to," answered Anatole continuing to smile.
	"Come! Balaga is here."
	Anatole rose and went into the dining room. Balaga was a famousroyka driver who had known Dolokhov and Anatole some six years andad given them good service with his troykas. More than once whennatole's regiment was stationed at Tver he had taken him from Tver inhe evening, brought him to Moscow by daybreak, and driven him backgain the next night. More than once he had enabled Dolokhov to escapehen pursued. More than once he had driven them through the townith gypsies and "ladykins" as he called the cocottes. More thannce in their service he had run over pedestrians and upset vehiclesn the streets of Moscow and had always been protected from theonsequences by "my gentlemen" as he called them. He had ruined morehan one horse in their service. More than once they had beaten him,nd more than once they had made him drunk on champagne and Madeira,hich he loved; and he knew more than one thing about each of themhich would long ago have sent an ordinary man to Siberia. Theyften called Balaga into their orgies and made him drink and dancet the gypsies', and more than one thousand rubles of their moneyad passed through his hands. In their service he risked his skinnd his life twenty times a year, and in their service had lost moreorses than the money he had from them would buy. But he liked them;iked that mad driving at twelve miles an hour, liked upsetting ariver or running down a pedestrian, and flying at full gallop throughhe Moscow streets. He liked to hear those wild, tipsy shouts behindim: "Get on! Get on!" when it was impossible to go any faster. Heiked giving a painful lash on the neck to some peasant who, more deadhan alive, was already hurrying out of his way. "Real gentlemen!"e considered them.
	Anatole and Dolokhov liked Balaga too for his masterly driving andecause he liked the things they liked. With others Balagaargained, charging twenty-five rubles for a two hours' drive, andarely drove himself, generally letting his young men do so. Butith "his gentlemen" he always drove himself and never demandednything for his work. Only a couple of times a year- when he knewrom their valets that they had money in hand- he would turn up of aorning quite sober and with a deep bow would ask them to help him.he gentlemen always made him sit down.
	"Do help me out, Theodore Ivanych, sir," or "your excellency," heould say. "I am quite out of horses. Let me have what you can to goo the fair."
	And Anatole and Dolokhov, when they had money, would give him ahousand or a couple of thousand rubles.
	Balaga was a fair-haired, short, and snub-nosed peasant of aboutwenty-seven; red-faced, with a particularly red thick neck,littering little eyes, and a small beard. He wore a fine,ark-blue, silk-lined cloth coat over a sheepskin.
	On entering the room now he crossed himself, turning toward theront corner of the room, and went up to Dolokhov, holding out amall, black hand.
	"Theodore Ivanych!" he said, bowing.
	"How d'you do, friend? Well, here he is!"
	"Good day, your excellency!" he said, again holding out his hando Anatole who had just come in.
	"I say, Balaga," said Anatole, putting his hands on the man'shoulders, "do you care for me or not? Eh? Now, do me a service....hat horses have you come with? Eh?"
	"As your messenger ordered, your special beasts," replied Balaga.
	"Well, listen, Balaga! Drive all three to death but get me theren three hours. Eh?"
	"When they are dead, what shall I drive?" said Balaga with a wink.
	"Mind, I'll smash your face in! Don't make jokes!" cried Anatole,uddenly rolling his eyes.
	"Why joke?" said the driver, laughing. "As if I'd grudge myentlemen anything! As fast as ever the horses can gallop, so faste'll go!"
	"Ah!" said Anatole. "Well, sit down."
	"Yes, sit down!" said Dolokhov.
	"I'll stand, Theodore Ivanych."
	"Sit down; nonsense! Have a drink!" said Anatole, and filled a largelass of Madeira for him.
	The driver's eyes sparkled at the sight of the wine. Afterefusing it for manners' sake, he drank it and wiped his mouth with red silk handkerchief he took out of his cap.
	"And when are we to start, your excellency?"
	"Well..." Anatole looked at his watch. "We'll start at once. Mind,alaga! You'll get there in time? Eh?"
	"That depends on our luck in starting, else why shouldn't we behere in time?" replied Balaga. "Didn't we get you to Tver in sevenours? I think you remember that, your excellency?"
	"Do you know, one Christmas I drove from Tver," said Anatole,milingly at the recollection and turning to Makarin who gazedapturously at him with wide-open eyes. "Will you believe it, Makarka,t took one's breath away, the rate we flew. We came across a train ofoaded sleighs and drove right over two of them. Eh?"
	"Those were horses!" Balaga continued the tale. "That time I'darnessed two young side horses with the bay in the shafts," he wentn, turning to Dolokhov. "Will you believe it, Theodore Ivanych, thosenimals flew forty miles? I couldn't hold them in, my hands grewumb in the sharp frost so that I threw down the reins- 'Catch holdourself, your excellency!' says I, and I just tumbled on the bottomf the sleigh and sprawled there. It wasn't a case of urging themn, there was no holding them in till we reached the place. The devilsook us there in three hours! Only the near one died of it."BK8|CH17
	CHAPTER XVII
	Anatole went out of the room and returned a few minutes laterearing a fur coat girt with a silver belt, and a sable cap jauntilyet on one side and very becoming to his handsome face. Havingooked in a mirror, and standing before Dolokhov in the same pose head assumed before it, he lifted a glass of wine.
	"Well, good-by, Theodore. Thank you for everything and farewell!"aid Anatole. "Well, comrades and friends..." he considered for aoment "...of my youth, farewell!" he said, turning to Makarin and thethers.
	Though they were all going with him, Anatole evidently wished toake something touching and solemn out of this address to hisomrades. He spoke slowly in a loud voice and throwing out his chestlightly swayed one leg.
	"All take glasses; you too, Balaga. Well, comrades and friends of myouth, we've had our fling and lived and reveled. Eh? And now, whenhall we meet again? I am going abroad. We have had a good time- nowarewell, lads! To our health! Hurrah!..." he cried, and emptyingis glass flung it on the floor.
	"To your health!" said Balaga who also emptied his glass, andiped his mouth with his handkerchief.
	Makarin embraced Anatole with tears in his eyes.
	"Ah, Prince, how sorry I am to part from you!
	"Let's go. Let's go!" cried Anatole.
	Balaga was about to leave the room.
	"No, stop!" said Anatole. "Shut the door; we have first to sit down.hat's the way."
	They shut the door and all sat down.
	"Now, quick march, lads!" said Anatole, rising.
	Joseph, his valet, handed him his sabretache and saber, and they allent out into the vestibule.
	"And where's the fur cloak?" asked Dolokhov. "Hey, Ignatka! Go toatrena Matrevna and ask her for the sable cloak. I have heard whatlopements are like," continued Dolokhov with a wink. "Why, she'llush out more dead than alive just in the things she is wearing; ifou delay at all there'll be tears and 'Papa' and 'Mamma,' and she'srozen in a minute and must go back- but you wrap the fur cloakound her first thing and carry her to the sleigh."
	The valet brought a woman's fox-lined cloak.
	"Fool, I told you the sable one! Hey, Matrena, the sable!" hehouted so that his voice rang far through the rooms.
	A handsome, slim, and pale-faced gypsy girl with glittering blackyes and curly blue-black hair, wearing a red shawl, ran out with aable mantle on her arm.
	"Here, I don't grudge it- take it!" she said, evidently afraid ofer master and yet regretful of her cloak.
	Dolokhov, without answering, took the cloak, threw it overatrena, and wrapped her up in it.
	"That's the way," said Dolokhov, "and then so!" and he turned theollar up round her head, leaving only a little of the face uncovered.And then so, do you see?" and he pushed Anatole's head forward toeet the gap left by the collar, through which Matrena's brilliantmile was seen.
	"Well, good-by, Matrena," said Anatole, kissing her. "Ah, myevels here are over. Remember me to Steshka. There, good-by! Good-by,atrena, wish me luck!"
	"Well, Prince, may God give you great luck!" said Matrena in herypsy accent.
	Two troykas were standing before the porch and two young driversere holding the horses. Balaga took his seat in the front one andolding his elbows high arranged the reins deliberately. Anatole andolokhov got in with him. Makarin, Khvostikov, and a valet seatedhemselves in the other sleigh.
	"Well, are you ready?" asked Balaga.
	"Go!" he cried, twisting the reins round his hands, and the troykaore down the Nikitski Boulevard.
	"Tproo! Get out of the way! Hi!... Tproo!..." The shouting of Balagand of the sturdy young fellow seated on the box was all that could beeard. On the Arbat Square the troyka caught against a carriage;omething cracked, shouts were heard, and the troyka flew along therbat Street.
	After taking a turn along the Podnovinski Boulevard, Balaga began toein in, and turning back drew up at the crossing of the oldonyusheny Street.
	The young fellow on the box jumped down to hold the horses andnatole and Dolokhov went along the pavement. When they reached theate Dolokhov whistled. The whistle was answered, and a maidservantan out.
	"Come into the courtyard or you'll be seen; she'll come outirectly," said she.
	Dolokhov stayed by the gate. Anatole followed the maid into theourtyard, turned the corner, and ran up into the porch.
	He was met by Gabriel, Marya Dmitrievna's gigantic footman.
	"Come to the mistress, please," said the footman in his deep bass,ntercepting any retreat.
	"To what Mistress? Who are you?" asked Anatole in a breathlesshisper.
	"Kindly step in, my orders are to bring you in."
	"Kuragin! Come back!" shouted Dolokhov. "Betrayed! Back!"
	Dolokhov, after Anatole entered, had remained at the wicket gate andas struggling with the yard porter who was trying to lock it. With last desperate effort Dolokhov pushed the porter aside, and whennatole ran back seized him by the arm, pulled him through the wicket,nd ran back with him to the troyka.BK8|CH18
	CHAPTER XVIII
	Marya Dmitrievna, having found Sonya weeping in the corridor, madeer confess everything, and intercepting the note to Natasha sheead it and went into Natasha's room with it in her hand.
	"You shameless good-for-nothing!" said she. "I won't hear a word."
	Pushing back Natasha who looked at her with astonished butearless eyes, she locked her in; and having given orders to theard porter to admit the persons who would be coming that evening, butot to let them out again, and having told the footman to bring themp to her, she seated herself in the drawing room to await thebductors.
	When Gabriel came to inform her that the men who had come had runway again, she rose frowning, and clasping her hands behind her pacedhrough the rooms a long time considering what she should do. Towardidnight she went to Natasha's room fingering the key in her pocket.onya was sitting sobbing in the corridor. "Marya Dmitrievna, forod's sake let me in to her!" she pleaded, but Marya Dmitrievnanlocked the door and went in without giving her an answer....Disgusting, abominable... In my house... horrid girl, hussy! I'm onlyorry for her father!" thought she, trying to restrain her wrath.Hard as it may be, I'll tell them all to hold their tongues andill hide it from the count." She entered the room with resoluteteps. Natasha lying on the sofa, her head hidden in her hands, andhe did not stir. She was in just the same position in which Maryamitrievna had left her.
	"A nice girl! Very nice!" said Marya Dmitrievna. "Arranging meetingsith lovers in my house! It's no use pretending: you listen when Ipeak to you!" And Marya Dmitrievna touched her arm. "Listen when when speak! You've disgraced yourself like the lowest of hussies. I'dreat you differently, but I'm sorry for your father, so I willonceal it."
	Natasha did not change her position, but her whole body heavedith noiseless, convulsive sobs which choked her. Marya Dmitrievnalanced round at Sonya and seated herself on the sofa beside Natasha.
	"It's lucky for him that he escaped me; but I'll find him!" she saidn her rough voice. "Do you hear what I am saying or not?" she added.
	She put her large hand under Natasha's face and turned it towarder. Both Marya Dmitrievna and Sonya were amazed when they saw howatasha looked. Her eyes were dry and glistening, her lips compressed,er cheeks sunken.
	"Let me be!... What is it to me?... I shall die!" she muttered,renching herself from Marya Dmitrievna's hands with a viciousffort and sinking down again into her former position.
	"Natalie!" said Marya Dmitrievna. "I wish for your good. Lietill, stay like that then, I won't touch you. But listen. I won'tell you how guilty you are. You know that yourself. But when yourather comes back tomorrow what am I to tell him? Eh?"
	Again Natasha's body shook with sobs.
	"Suppose he finds out, and your brother, and your betrothed?"
	"I have no betrothed: I have refused him!" cried Natasha.
	"That's all the same," continued Dmitrievna. "If they hear ofhis, will they let it pass? He, your father, I know him... if hehallenges him to a duel will that be all right? Eh?"
	"Oh, let me be! Why have you interfered at all? Why? Why? Whosked you to?" shouted Natasha, raising herself on the sofa andooking malignantly at Marya Dmitrievna.
	"But what did you want?" cried Marya Dmitrievna, growing angrygain. "Were you kept under lock and key? Who hindered his coming tohe house? Why carry you off as if you were some gypsy singingirl?... Well, if he had carried you off... do you think they wouldn'tave found him? Your father, or brother, or your betrothed? And he's acoundrel, a wretch- that's a fact!"
	"He is better than any of you!" exclaimed Natasha getting up. "Ifou hadn't interfered... Oh, my God! What is it all? What is it?onya, why?... Go away!"
	And she burst into sobs with the despairing vehemence with whicheople bewail disasters they feel they have themselves occasioned.arya Dmitrievna was to speak again but Natasha cried out:
	"Go away! Go away! You all hate and despise me!" and she threwerself back on the sofa.
	Marya Dmitrievna went on admonishing her for some time, enjoining oner that it must all be kept from her father and assuring her thatobody would know anything about it if only Natasha herself wouldndertake to forget it all and not let anyone see that something hadappened. Natasha did not reply, nor did she sob any longer, but sherew cold and had a shivering fit. Marya Dmitrievna put a pillow underer head, covered her with two quilts, and herself brought her someime-flower water, but Natasha did not respond to her.
	"Well, let her sleep," said Marya Dmitrievna as she went of the roomupposing Natasha to be asleep.
	But Natasha was not asleep; with pale face and fixed wide-openyes she looked straight before her. All that night she did notleep or weep and did not speak to Sonya who got up and went to hereveral times.
	Next day Count Rostov returned from his estate near Moscow in timeor lunch as he had promised. He was in very good spirits; theffair with the purchaser was going on satisfactorily, and there wasothing to keep him any longer in Moscow, away from the countesshom he missed. Marya Dmitrievna met him and told him that Natasha hadeen very unwell the day before and that they had sent for the doctor,ut that she was better now. Natasha had not left her room thatorning. With compressed and parched lips and dry fixed eyes, sheat at the window, uneasily watching the people who drove past andurriedly glancing round at anyone who entered the room. She wasvidently expecting news of him and that he would come or wouldrite to her.
	When the count came to see her she turned anxiously round at theound of a man's footstep, and then her face resumed its cold andalevolent expression. She did not even get up to greet him. "Whats the matter with you, my angel? Are you ill?" asked the count.
	After a moment's silence Natasha answered: "Yes, ill."
	In reply to the count's anxious inquiries as to why she was soejected and whether anything had happened to her betrothed, shessured him that nothing had happened and asked him not to worry.arya Dmitrievna confirmed Natasha's assurances that nothing hadappened. From the pretense of illness, from his daughter'sistress, and by the embarrassed faces of Sonya and Maryamitrievna, the count saw clearly that something had gone wrong duringis absence, but it was so terrible for him to think that anythingisgraceful had happened to his beloved daughter, and he so prized hiswn cheerful tranquillity, that he avoided inquiries and tried tossure himself that nothing particularly had happened; and he was onlyissatisfied that her indisposition delayed their return to theountry.BK8|CH19
	CHAPTER XIX
	From the day his wife arrived in Moscow Pierre had been intending too away somewhere, so as not to be near her. Soon after the Rostovsame to Moscow the effect Natasha had on him made him hasten toarry out his intention. He went to Tver to see Joseph Alexeevich'sidow, who had long since promised to hand over to him some papersf her deceased husband's.
	When he returned to Moscow Pierre was handed a letter from Maryamitrievna asking him to come and see her on a matter of greatmportance relating to Andrew Bolkonski and his betrothed. Pierread been avoiding Natasha because it seemed to him that his feelingor her was stronger than a married man's should be for his friend'siancee. Yet some fate constantly threw them together.
	"What can have happened? And what can they want with me?" thought hes he dressed to go to Marya Dmitrievna's. "If only Prince Andrewould hurry up and come and marry her!" thought he on his way to theouse.
	On the Tverskoy Boulevard a familiar voice called to him.
	"Pierre! Been back long?" someone shouted. Pierre raised his head.n a sleigh drawn by two gray trotting-horses that were bespatteringhe dashboard with snow, Anatole and his constant companion Makarinashed past. Anatole was sitting upright in the classic pose ofilitary dandies, the lower part of his face hidden by his beaverollar and his head slightly bent. His face was fresh and rosy, hishite-plumed hat, tilted to one side, disclosed his curled and pomadedair besprinkled with powdery snow.
	"Yes, indeed, that's a true sage," thought Pierre. "He seesothing beyond the pleasure of the moment, nothing troubles him and soe is always cheerful, satisfied, and serene. What wouldn't I giveo be like him!" he thought enviously.
	In Marya Dmitrievna's anteroom the footman who helped him off withis fur coat said that the mistress asked him to come to her bedroom.
	When he opened the ballroom door Pierre saw Natasha sitting at theindow, with a thin, pale, and spiteful face. She glanced round atim, frowned, and left the room with an expression of cold dignity.
	"What has happened?" asked Pierre, entering Marya Dmitrievna's room.
	"Fine doings!" answered Dmitrievna. "For fifty-eight years have Iived in this world and never known anything so disgraceful!"
	And having put him on his honor not to repeat anything she told him,arya Dmitrievna informed him that Natasha had refused Prince Andrewithout her parents' knowledge and that the cause of this wasnatole Kuragin into whose society Pierre's wife had thrown her andith whom Natasha had tried to elope during her father's absence, inrder to be married secretly.
	Pierre raised his shoulders and listened open-mouthed to what wasold him, scarcely able to believe his own ears. That Princendrew's deeply loved affianced wife- the same Natasha Rostova whosed to be so charming- should give up Bolkonski for that fool Anatoleho was already secretly married (as Pierre knew), and should be so inove with him as to agree to run away with him, was something Pierreould not conceive and could not imagine.
	He could not reconcile the charming impression he had of Natasha,hom he had known from a child, with this new conception of heraseness, folly, and cruelty. He thought of his wife. "They are alllike!" he said to himself, reflecting that he was not the only mannfortunate enough to be tied to a bad woman. But still he pitiedrince Andrew to the point of tears and sympathized with his woundedride, and the more he pitied his friend the more did he think withontempt and even with disgust of that Natasha who had just passed himn the ballroom with such a look of cold dignity. He did not know thatatasha's soul was overflowing with despair, shame, and humiliation,nd that it was not her fault that her face happened to assume anxpression of calm dignity and severity.
	"But how get married?" said Pierre, in answer to Marya Dmitrievna.He could not marry- he is married!"
	"Things get worse from hour to hour!" ejaculated Marya Dmitrievna.A nice youth! What a scoundrel! And she's expecting him- expectingim since yesterday. She must be told! Then at least she won't go onxpecting him."
	After hearing the details of Anatole's marriage from Pierre, andiving vent to her anger against Anatole in words of abuse, Maryamitrievna told Pierre why she had sent for him. She was afraid thathe count or Bolkonski, who might arrive at any moment, if they knewf this affair (which she hoped to hide from them) might challengenatole to a duel, and she therefore asked Pierre to tell hisrother-in-law in her name to leave Moscow and not dare to let her setyes on him again. Pierre- only now realizing the danger to the oldount, Nicholas, and Prince Andrew- promised to do as she wished.aving briefly and exactly explained her wishes to him, she let him goo the drawing room.
	"Mind, the count knows nothing. Behave as if you know nothingither," she said. "And I will go and tell her it is no usexpecting him! And stay to dinner if you care to!" she called afterierre.
	Pierre met the old count, who seemed nervous and upset. That morningatasha had told him that she had rejected Bolkonski.
	"Troubles, troubles, my dear fellow!" he said to Pierre. "Whatroubles one has with these girls without their mother! I do so regretaving come here.... I will be frank with you. Have you heard sheas broken off her engagement without consulting anybody? It's truehis engagement never was much to my liking. Of course he is anxcellent man, but still, with his father's disapproval theyouldn't have been happy, and Natasha won't lack suitors. Still, itas been going on so long, and to take such a step without father's orother's consent! And now she's ill, and God knows what! It's hard,ount, hard to manage daughters in their mother's absence...."
	Pierre saw that the count was much upset and tried to change theubject, but the count returned to his troubles.
	Sonya entered the room with an agitated face.
	"Natasha is not quite well; she's in her room and would like toee you. Marya Dmitrievna is with her and she too asks you to come."
	"Yes, you are a great friend of Bolkonski's, no doubt she wants toend him a message," said the count. "Oh dear! Oh dear! How happy itll was!"
	And clutching the spare gray locks on his temples the count left theoom.
	When Marya Dmitrievna told Natasha that Anatole was married, Natashaid not wish to believe it and insisted on having it confirmed byierre himself. Sonya told Pierre this as she led him along theorridor to Natasha's room.
	Natasha, pale and stern, was sitting beside Marya Dmitrievna, ander eyes, glittering feverishly, met Pierre with a questioning lookhe moment he entered. She did not smile or nod, but only gazedixedly at him, and her look asked only one thing: was he a friend, orike the others an enemy in regard to Anatole? As for Pierre, hevidently did not exist for her.
	"He knows all about it," said Marya Dmitrievna pointing to Pierrend addressing Natasha. "Let him tell you whether I have told theruth."
	Natasha looked from one to the other as a hunted and woundednimal looks at the approaching dogs and sportsmen.
	"Natalya Ilynichna," Pierre began, dropping his eyes with aeeling of pity for her and loathing for the thing he had to do,whether it is true or not should make no difference to you,ecause..."
	"Then it is not true that he's married!"
	"Yes, it is true."
	"Has he been married long?" she asked. "On your honor?..."
	Pierre gave his word of honor.
	"Is he still here?" she asked, quickly.
	"Yes, I have just seen him."
	She was evidently unable to speak and made a sign with her handshat they should leave her alone.BK8|CH20
	CHAPTER XX
	Pierre did not stay for dinner, but left the room and went away atnce. He drove through the town seeking Anatole Kuragin, at thehought of whom now the blood rushed to his heart and he felt aifficulty in breathing. He was not at the ice hills, nor at theypsies', nor at Komoneno's. Pierre drove to the Club. In the Club allas going on as usual. The members who were assembling for dinner wereitting about in groups; they greeted Pierre and spoke of the townews. The footman having greeted him, knowing his habits and hiscquaintances, told him there was a place left for him in the smallining room and that Prince Michael Zakharych was in the library,ut Paul Timofeevich had not yet arrived. One of Pierre'scquaintances, while they were talking about the weather, asked ife had heard of Kuragin's abduction of Rostova which was talked ofn the town, and was it true? Pierre laughed and said it wasonsense for he had just come from the Rostovs'. He asked everyonebout Anatole. One man told him he had not come yet, and anotherhat he was coming to dinner. Pierre felt it strange to see this calm,ndifferent crowd of people unaware of what was going on in hisoul. He paced through the ballroom, waited till everyone had come,nd as Anatole had not turned up did not stay for dinner but droveome.
	Anatole, for whom Pierre was looking, dined that day witholokhov, consulting him as to how to remedy this unfortunateffair. It seemed to him essential to see Natasha. In the evening herove to his sister's to discuss with her how to arrange a meeting.hen Pierre returned home after vainly hunting all over Moscow, hisalet informed him that Prince Anatole was with the countess. Theountess' drawing room was full of guests.
	Pierre without greeting his wife whom he had not seen since hiseturn- at that moment she was more repulsive to him than ever-ntered the drawing room and seeing Anatole went up to him.
	"Ah, Pierre," said the countess going up to her husband. "Youon't know what a plight our Anatole..."
	She stopped, seeing in the forward thrust of her husband's head,n his glowing eyes and his resolute gait, the terrible indications ofhat rage and strength which she knew and had herself experiencedfter his duel with Dolokhov.
	"Where you are, there is vice and evil!" said Pierre to his wife.Anatole, come with me! I must speak to you," he added in French.
	Anatole glanced round at his sister and rose submissively, readyo follow Pierre. Pierre, taking him by the arm, pulled him towardimself and was leading him from the room.
	"If you allow yourself in my drawing room..." whispered Helene,ut Pierre did not reply and went out of the room.
	Anatole followed him with his usual jaunty step but his faceetrayed anxiety.
	Having entered his study Pierre closed the door and addressednatole without looking at him.
	"You promised Countess Rostova to marry her and were about tolope with her, is that so?"
	"Mon cher," answered Anatole (their whole conversation was inrench), "I don't consider myself bound to answer questions put toe in that tone."
	Pierre's face, already pale, became distorted by fury. He seizednatole by the collar of his uniform with his big hand and shook himrom side to side till Anatole's face showed a sufficient degree oferror.
	"When I tell you that I must talk to you!..." repeated Pierre.
	"Come now, this is stupid. What?" said Anatole, fingering a buttonf his collar that had been wrenched loose with a bit of the cloth.
	"You're a scoundrel and a blackguard, and I don't know what deprivese from the pleasure of smashing your head with this!" said Pierre,xpressing himself so artificially because he was talking French.
	He took a heavy paperweight and lifted it threateningly, but at onceut it back in its place.
	"Did you promise to marry her?"
	"I... I didn't think of it. I never promised, because..."
	Pierre interrupted him.
	"Have you any letters of hers? Any letters?" he said, movingoward Anatole.
	Anatole glanced at him and immediately thrust his hand into hisocket and drew out his pocketbook.
	Pierre took the letter Anatole handed him and, pushing aside a tablehat stood in his way, threw himself on the sofa.
	"I shan't be violent, don't be afraid!" said Pierre in answer to arightened gesture of Anatole's. "First, the letters," said he, asf repeating a lesson to himself. "Secondly," he continued after ahort pause, again rising and again pacing the room, "tomorrow youust get out of Moscow."
	"But how can I?..."
	"Thirdly," Pierre continued without listening to him, "you mustever breathe a word of what has passed between you and Countessostova. I know I can't prevent your doing so, but if you have a sparkf conscience..." Pierre paced the room several times in silence.
	Anatole sat at a table frowning and biting his lips.
	"After all, you must understand that besides your pleasure theres such a thing as other people's happiness and peace, and that youre ruining a whole life for the sake of amusing yourself! Amuseourself with women like my wife- with them you are within yourights, for they know what you want of them. They are armed againstou by the same experience of debauchery; but to promise a maid toarry her... to deceive, to kidnap.... Don't you understand that it iss mean as beating an old man or a child?..."
	Pierre paused and looked at Anatole no longer with an angry but with questioning look.
	"I don't know about that, eh?" said Anatole, growing moreonfident as Pierre mastered his wrath. "I don't know that and don'tant to," he said, not looking at Pierre and with a slight tremor ofis lower jaw, "but you have used such words to me- 'mean' and son- which as a man of honor I can't allow anyone to use."
	Pierre glanced at him with amazement, unable to understand what heanted.
	"Though it was tete-a-tete," Anatole continued, "still I can't..."
	"Is it satisfaction you want?" said Pierre ironically.
	"You could at least take back your words. What? If you want me to dos you wish, eh?"
	"I take them back, I take them back!" said Pierre, "and I ask you toorgive me." Pierre involuntarily glanced at the loose button. "And ifou require money for your journey..."
	Anatole smiled. The expression of that base and cringing smile,hich Pierre knew so well in his wife, revolted him.
	"Oh, vile and heartless brood!" he exclaimed, and left the room.
	Next day Anatole left for Petersburg.BK8|CH21
	CHAPTER XXI
	Pierre drove to Marya Dmitrievna's to tell her of the fulfillment ofer wish that Kuragin should be banished from Moscow. The wholeouse was in a state of alarm and commotion. Natasha was very ill,aving, as Marya Dmitrievna told him in secret, poisoned herself theight after she had been told that Anatole was married, with somersenic she had stealthily procured. After swallowing a little she hadeen so frightened that she woke Sonya and told her what she had done.he necessary antidotes had been administered in time and she wasow out of danger, though still so weak that it was out of theuestion to move her to the country, and so the countess had been sentor. Pierre saw the distracted count, and Sonya, who had aear-stained face, but he could not see Natasha.
	Pierre dined at the club that day and heard on all sides gossipbout the attempted abduction of Rostova. He resolutely denied theseumors, assuring everyone that nothing had happened except that hisrother-in-law had proposed to her and been refused. It seemed toierre that it was his duty to conceal the whole affair ande-establish Natasha's reputation.
	He was awaiting Prince Andrew's return with dread and went every dayo the old prince's for news of him.
	Old Prince Bolkonski heard all the rumors current in the town fromademoiselle Bourienne and had read the note to Princess Mary in whichatasha had broken off her engagement. He seemed in better spiritshan usual and awaited his son with great impatience.
	Some days after Anatole's departure Pierre received a note fromrince Andrew, informing him of his arrival and asking him to comeo see him.
	As soon as he reached Moscow, Prince Andrew had received from hisather Natasha's note to Princess Mary breaking off her engagementMademoiselle Bourienne had purloined it from Princess Mary andiven it to the old prince), and he heard from him the story ofatasha's elopement, with additions.
	Prince Andrew had arrived in the evening and Pierre came to seeim next morning. Pierre expected to find Prince Andrew in almosthe same state as Natasha and was therefore surprised on enteringhe drawing room to hear him in the study talking in a loud animatedoice about some intrigue going on in Petersburg. The old prince'soice and another now and then interrupted him. Princess Mary came outo meet Pierre. She sighed, looking toward the door of the roomhere Prince Andrew was, evidently intending to express her sympathyith his sorrow, but Pierre saw by her face that she was glad botht what had happened and at the way her brother had taken the newsf Natasha's faithlessness.
	"He says he expected it," she remarked. "I know his pride will notet him express his feelings, but still he has taken it better, faretter, than I expected. Evidently it had to be...."
	"But is it possible that all is really ended?" asked Pierre.
	Princess Mary looked at him with astonishment. She did notnderstand how he could ask such a question. Pierre went into thetudy. Prince Andrew, greatly changed and plainly in better health,ut with a fresh horizontal wrinkle between his brows, stood inivilian dress facing his father and Prince Meshcherski, warmlyisputing and vigorously gesticulating. The conversation was aboutperanski- the news of whose sudden exile and alleged treachery hadust reached Moscow.
	"Now he is censured and accused by all who were enthusiastic aboutim a month ago," Prince Andrew was saying, "and by those who werenable to understand his aims. To judge a man who is in disfavor ando throw on him all the blame of other men's mistakes is very easy,ut I maintain that if anything good has been accomplished in thiseign it was done by him, by him alone."
	He paused at the sight of Pierre. His face quivered andmmediately assumed a vindictive expression.
	"Posterity will do him justice," he concluded, and at once turned toierre.
	"Well, how are you? Still getting stouter?" he said withnimation, but the new wrinkle on his forehead deepened. "Yes, I amell," he said in answer to Pierre's question, and smiled.
	To Pierre that smile said plainly: "I am well, but my health isow of no use to anyone."
	After a few words to Pierre about the awful roads from the Polishrontier, about people he had met in Switzerland who knew Pierre,nd about M. Dessalles, whom he had brought from abroad to be hison's tutor, Prince Andrew again joined warmly in the conversationbout Speranski which was still going on between the two old men.
	"If there were treason, or proofs of secret relations with Napoleon,hey would have been made public," he said with warmth and haste. "Io not, and never did, like Speranski personally, but I like justice!"
	Pierre now recognized in his friend a need with which he was onlyoo familiar, to get excited and to have arguments about extraneousatters in order to stifle thoughts that were too oppressive and toontimate. When Prince Meshcherski had left, Prince Andrew tookierre's arm and asked him into the room that had been assigned him. Aed had been made up there, and some open portmanteaus and trunkstood about. Prince Andrew went to one and took out a small casket,rom which he drew a packet wrapped in paper. He did it all silentlynd very quickly. He stood up and coughed. His face was gloomy and hisips compressed.
	"Forgive me for troubling you..."
	Pierre saw that Prince Andrew was going to speak of Natasha, and hisroad face expressed pity and sympathy. This expression irritatedrince Andrew, and in a determined, ringing, and unpleasant tone heontinued:
	"I have received a refusal from Countess Rostova and have heardeports of your brother-in-law having sought her hand, or something ofhat kind. Is that true?"
	"Both true and untrue," Pierre began; but Prince Andrewnterrupted him.
	"Here are her letters and her portrait," said he.
	He took the packet from the table and handed it to Pierre.
	"Give this to the countess... if you see her."
	"She is very ill," said Pierre.
	"Then she is here still?" said Prince Andrew. "And Princeuragin?" he added quickly.
	"He left long ago. She has been at death's door."
	"I much regret her illness," said Prince Andrew; and he smiledike his father, coldly, maliciously, and unpleasantly.
	"So Monsieur Kuragin has not honored Countess Rostova with hisand?" said Prince Andrew, and he snorted several times.
	"He could not marry, for he was married already," said Pierre.
	Prince Andrew laughed disagreeably, again reminding one of hisather.
	"And where is your brother-in-law now, if I may ask?" he said.
	"He has gone to Peters... But I don't know," said Pierre.
	"Well, it doesn't matter," said Prince Andrew. "Tell Countessostova that she was and is perfectly free and that I wish her allhat is good."
	Pierre took the packet. Prince Andrew, as if trying to rememberhether he had something more to say, or waiting to see if Pierreould say anything, looked fixedly at him.
	"I say, do you remember our discussion in Petersburg?" asked Pierre,about..."
	"Yes," returned Prince Andrew hastily. "I said that a fallen womanhould be forgiven, but I didn't say I could forgive her. I can't."
	"But can this be compared...?" said Pierre.
	Prince Andrew interrupted him and cried sharply: "Yes, ask herand again, be magnanimous, and so on?... Yes, that would be veryoble, but I am unable to follow in that gentleman's footsteps. If youish to be my friend never speak to me of that... of all that! Well,ood-by. So you'll give her the packet?"
	Pierre left the room and went to the old prince and Princess Mary.
	The old man seemed livelier than usual. Princess Mary was the sames always, but beneath her sympathy for her brother, Pierre noticeder satisfaction that the engagement had been broken off. Looking athem Pierre realized what contempt and animosity they all felt for theostovs, and that it was impossible in their presence even toention the name of her who could give up Prince Andrew for anyonelse.
	At dinner the talk turned on the war, the approach of which wasecoming evident. Prince Andrew talked incessantly, arguing now withis father, now with the Swiss tutor Dessalles, and showing annnatural animation, the cause of which Pierre so well understood.BK8|CH22
	CHAPTER XXII
	That same evening Pierre went to the Rostovs' to fulfill theommission entrusted to him. Natasha was in bed, the count at thelub, and Pierre, after giving the letters to Sonya, went to Maryamitrievna who was interested to know how Prince Andrew had takenhe news. Ten minutes later Sonya came to Marya Dmitrievna.
	"Natasha insists on seeing Count Peter Kirilovich," said she.
	"But how? Are we to take him up to her? The room there has noteen tidied up."
	"No, she has dressed and gone into the drawing room," said Sonya.
	Marya Dmitrievna only shrugged her shoulders.
	"When will her mother come? She has worried me to death! Now mind,on't tell her everything!" said she to Pierre. "One hasn't theeart to scold her, she is so much to be pitied, so much to beitied."
	Natasha was standing in the middle of the drawing room, emaciated,ith a pale set face, but not at all shamefaced as Pierre expectedo find her. When he appeared at the door she grew flurried, evidentlyndecided whether to go to meet him or to wait till he came up.
	Pierre hastened to her. He thought she would give him her hand assual; but she, stepping up to him, stopped, breathing heavily, herrms hanging lifelessly just in the pose she used to stand in when sheent to the middle of the ballroom to sing, but with quite a differentxpression of face.
	"Peter Kirilovich," she began rapidly, "Prince Bolkonski was yourriend- is your friend," she corrected herself. (It seemed to her thatverything that had once been must now be different.) "He told me onceo apply to you..."
	Pierre sniffed as he looked at her, but did not speak. Till thene had reproached her in his heart and tried to despise her, but heow felt so sorry for her that there was no room in his soul foreproach.
	"He is here now: tell him... to for... forgive me!" She stoppednd breathed still more quickly, but did not shed tears.
	"Yes... I will tell him," answered Pierre; "but..."
	He did not know what to say.
	Natasha was evidently dismayed at the thought of what he might thinkhe had meant.
	"No, I know all is over," she said hurriedly. "No, that can nevere. I'm only tormented by the wrong I have done him. Tell him onlyhat I beg him to forgive, forgive, forgive me for everything...."
	She trembled all over and sat down on a chair.
	A sense of pity he had never before known overflowed Pierre's heart.
	"I will tell him, I will tell him everything once more," saidierre. "But... I should like to know one thing...."
	"Know what?" Natasha's eyes asked.
	"I should like to know, did you love..." Pierre did not know howo refer to Anatole and flushed at the thought of him- "did you lovehat bad man?"
	"Don't call him bad!" said Natasha. "But I don't know, don't know atll...."
	She began to cry and a still greater sense of pity, tenderness,nd love welled up in Pierre. He felt the tears trickle under hispectacles and hoped they would not be noticed.
	"We won't speak of it any more, my dear," said Pierre, and hisentle, cordial tone suddenly seemed very strange to Natasha.
	"We won't speak of it, my dear- I'll tell him everything; but onehing I beg of you, consider me your friend and if you want help,dvice, or simply to open your heart to someone- not now, but whenour mind is clearer think of me!" He took her hand and kissed it.I shall be happy if it's in my power..."
	Pierre grew confused.
	"Don't speak to me like that. I am not worth it!" exclaimedatasha and turned to leave the room, but Pierre held her hand.
	He knew he had something more to say to her. But when he said ite was amazed at his own words.
	"Stop, stop! You have your whole life before you," said he to her.
	"Before me? No! All is over for me," she replied with shame andelf-abasement.
	 "All over?" he repeated. "If I were not myself, but the handsomest,leverest, and best man in the world, and were free, I would thisoment ask on my knees for your hand and your love!"
	For the first time for many days Natasha wept tears of gratitude andenderness, and glancing at Pierre she went out of the room.
	Pierre too when she had gone almost ran into the anteroom,estraining tears of tenderness and joy that choked him, and withoutinding the sleeves of his fur cloak threw it on and got into hisleigh.
	"Where to now, your excellency?" asked the coachman.
	"Where to?" Pierre asked himself. "Where can I go now? Surely not tohe Club or to pay calls?" All men seemed so pitiful, so poor, inomparison with this feeling of tenderness and love he experienced: inomparison with that softened, grateful, last look she had given himhrough her tears.
	"Home!" said Pierre, and despite twenty-two degrees of frostahrenheit he threw open the bearskin cloak from his broad chest andnhaled the air with joy.
	It was clear and frosty. Above the dirty, ill-lit streets, above thelack roofs, stretched the dark starry sky. Only looking up at the skyid Pierre cease to feel how sordid and humiliating were all mundanehings compared with the heights to which his soul had just beenaised. At the entrance to the Arbat Square an immense expanse of darktarry sky presented itself to his eyes. Almost in the center of it,bove the Prechistenka Boulevard, surrounded and sprinkled on allides by stars but distinguished from them all by its nearness tohe earth, its white light, and its long uplifted tail, shone thenormous and brilliant comet of 18l2- the comet which was said toortend all kinds of woes and the end of the world. In Pierre,owever, that comet with its long luminous tail aroused no feelingf fear. On the contrary he gazed joyfully, his eyes moist with tears,t this bright comet which, having traveled in its orbit withnconceivable velocity through immeasurable space, seemed suddenly-ike an arrow piercing the earth- to remain fixed in a chosen spot,igorously holding its tail erect, shining and displaying its whiteight amid countless other scintillating stars. It seemed to Pierrehat this comet fully responded to what was passing in his ownoftened and uplifted soul, now blossoming into a new life.BK9	                              BOOK NINE: 1812BK9|CH1
	CHAPTER I
	From the close of the year 1811 intensified arming and concentratingf the forces of Western Europe began, and in 1812 these forces-illions of men, reckoning those transporting and feeding the army-oved from the west eastwards to the Russian frontier, toward whichince 1811 Russian forces had been similarly drawn. On the twelfthf June, 1812, the forces of Western Europe crossed the Russianrontier and war began, that is, an event took place opposed touman reason and to human nature. Millions of men perpetratedgainst one another such innumerable crimes, frauds, treacheries,hefts, forgeries, issues of false money, burglaries, incendiarisms,nd murders as in whole centuries are not recorded in the annals ofll the law courts of the world, but which those who committed themid not at the time regard as being crimes.
	What produced this extraordinary occurrence? What were its causes?he historians tell us with naive assurance that its causes were therongs inflicted on the Duke of Oldenburg, the nonobservance of theontinental System, the ambition of Napoleon, the firmness oflexander, the mistakes of the diplomatists, and so on.
	Consequently, it would only have been necessary for Metternich,umyantsev, or Talleyrand, between a levee and an evening party, toave taken proper pains and written a more adroit note, or forapoleon to have written to Alexander: "My respected Brother, Ionsent to restore the duchy to the Duke of Oldenburg"- and thereould have been no war.
	We can understand that the matter seemed like that toontemporaries. It naturally seemed to Napoleon that the war wasaused by England's intrigues (as in fact he said on the island of St.elena). It naturally seemed to members of the English Parliament thathe cause of the war was Napoleon's ambition; to the Duke ofldenburg, that the cause of the war was the violence done to him;o businessmen that the cause of the way was the Continental Systemhich was ruining Europe; to the generals and old soldiers that thehief reason for the war was the necessity of giving themmployment; to the legitimists of that day that it was the need ofe-establishing les bons principes, and to the diplomatists of thatime that it all resulted from the fact that the alliance betweenussia and Austria in 1809 had not been sufficiently well concealedrom Napoleon, and from the awkward wording of Memorandum No. 178.t is natural that these and a countless and infinite quantity ofther reasons, the number depending on the endless diversity of pointsf view, presented themselves to the men of that day; but to us, toosterity who view the thing that happened in all its magnitude anderceive its plain and terrible meaning, these causes seemnsufficient. To us it is incomprehensible that millions ofhristian men killed and tortured each other either because Napoleonas ambitious or Alexander was firm, or because England's policy wasstute or the Duke of Oldenburg wronged. We cannot grasp whatonnection such circumstances have with the actual fact of slaughternd violence: why because the Duke was wronged, thousands of menrom the other side of Europe killed and ruined the people of Smolensknd Moscow and were killed by them.
	To us, their descendants, who are not historians and are not carriedway by the process of research and can therefore regard the eventith unclouded common sense, an incalculable number of causesresent themselves. The deeper we delve in search of these causeshe more of them we find; and each separate cause or whole series ofauses appears to us equally valid in itself and equally false byts insignificance compared to the magnitude of the events, and by itsmpotence- apart from the cooperation of all the other coincidentauses- to occasion the event. To us, the wish or objection of this orhat French corporal to serve a second term appears as much a cause asapoleon's refusal to withdraw his troops beyond the Vistula and toestore the duchy of Oldenburg; for had he not wished to serve, andad a second, a third, and a thousandth corporal and private alsoefused, there would have been so many less men in Napoleon's army andhe war could not have occurred.
	Had Napoleon not taken offense at the demand that he should withdraweyond the Vistula, and not ordered his troops to advance, there wouldave been no war; but had all his sergeants objected to serving aecond term then also there could have been no war. Nor could thereave been a war had there been no English intrigues and no Duke ofldenburg, and had Alexander not felt insulted, and had there not beenn autocratic government in Russia, or a Revolution in France and aubsequent dictatorship and Empire, or all the things that producedhe French Revolution, and so on. Without each of these causes nothingould have happened. So all these causes- myriads of causes- coincidedo bring it about. And so there was no one cause for thatccurrence, but it had to occur because it had to. Millions of men,enouncing their human feelings and reason, had to go from west toast to slay their fellows, just as some centuries previously hordesf men had come from the east to the west, slaying their fellows.
	The actions of Napoleon and Alexander, on whose words the eventeemed to hang, were as little voluntary as the actions of any soldierho was drawn into the campaign by lot or by conscription. Thisould not be otherwise, for in order that the will of Napoleon andlexander (on whom the event seemed to depend) should be carriedut, the concurrence of innumerable circumstances was needed withoutny one of which the event could not have taken place. It wasecessary that millions of men in whose hands lay the real power-he soldiers who fired, or transported provisions and guns- shouldonsent to carry out the will of these weak individuals, and shouldave been induced to do so by an infinite number of diverse andomplex causes.
	We are forced to fall back on fatalism as an explanation ofrrational events (that is to say, events the reasonableness ofhich we do not understand). The more we try to explain such events inistory reasonably, the more unreasonable and incomprehensible do theyecome to us.
	Each man lives for himself, using his freedom to attain his personalims, and feels with his whole being that he can now do or abstainrom doing this or that action; but as soon as he has done it, thatction performed at a certain moment in time becomes irrevocable andelongs to history, in which it has not a free but a predestinedignificance.
	There are two sides to the life of every man, his individual life,hich is the more free the more abstract its interests, and hislemental hive life in which he inevitably obeys laws laid down forim.
	Man lives consciously for himself, but is an unconsciousnstrument in the attainment of the historic, universal, aims ofumanity. A deed done is irrevocable, and its result coinciding inime with the actions of millions of other men assumes an historicignificance. The higher a man stands on the social ladder, the moreeople he is connected with and the more power he has over others, theore evident is the predestination and inevitability of his everyction.
	"The king's heart is in the hands of the Lord."
	A king is history's slave.
	History, that is, the unconscious, general, hive life of mankind,ses every moment of the life of kings as a tool for its own purposes.
	Though Napoleon at that time, in 1812, was more convinced thanver that it depended on him, verser (ou ne pas verser) le sang de seseuples*- as Alexander expressed it in the last letter he wrote him-e had never been so much in the grip of inevitable laws, whichompelled him, while thinking that he was acting on his ownolition, to perform for the hive life- that is to say, for history-hatever had to be performed.
	*"To shed (or not to shed) the blood of his peoples."
	The people of the west moved eastwards to slay their fellow men, andy the law of coincidence thousands of minute causes fitted in ando-ordinated to produce that movement and war: reproaches for theonobservance of the Continental System, the Duke of Oldenburg'srongs, the movement of troops into Prussia- undertaken (as iteemed to Napoleon) only for the purpose of securing an armed peace,he French Emperor's love and habit of war coinciding with hiseople's inclinations, allurement by the grandeur of the preparations,nd the expenditure on those preparations and the need of obtainingdvantages to compensate for that expenditure, the intoxicating honorse received in Dresden, the diplomatic negotiations which, in thepinion of contemporaries, were carried on with a sincere desire tottain peace, but which only wounded the self-love of both sides,nd millions and millions of other causes that adapted themselves tohe event that was happening or coincided with it.
	When an apple has ripened and falls, why does it fall? Because ofts attraction to the earth, because its stalk withers, because its dried by the sun, because it grows heavier, because the wind shakest, or because the boy standing below wants to eat it?
	Nothing is the cause. All this is only the coincidence of conditionsn which all vital organic and elemental events occur. And theotanist who finds that the apple falls because the cellular tissueecays and so forth is equally right with the child who stands underhe tree and says the apple fell because he wanted to eat it andrayed for it. Equally right or wrong is he who says that Napoleonent to Moscow because he wanted to, and perished because Alexanderesired his destruction, and he who says that an undermined hilleighing a million tons fell because the last navvy struck it forhe last time with his mattock. In historic events the so-called greaten are labels giving names to events, and like labels they have buthe smallest connection with the event itself.
	Every act of theirs, which appears to them an act of their own will,s in an historical sense involuntary and is related to the wholeourse of history and predestined from eternity.BK9|CH2
	CHAPTER II
	On the twenty-ninth of May Napoleon left Dresden, where he had spenthree weeks surrounded by a court that included princes, dukes, kings,nd even an emperor. Before leaving, Napoleon showed favor to themperor, kings, and princes who had deserved it, reprimanded the kingsnd princes with whom he was dissatisfied, presented pearls andiamonds of his own- that is, which he had taken from other kings-o the Empress of Austria, and having, as his historian tells us,enderly embraced the Empress Marie Louise- who regarded him as herusband, though he had left another wife in Paris- left her grieved byhe parting which she seemed hardly able to bear. Though theiplomatists still firmly believed in the possibility of peace andorked zealously to that end, and though the Emperor Napoleonimself wrote a letter to Alexander, calling him Monsieur mon frere,nd sincerely assured him that he did not want war and would alwaysove and honor him- yet he set off to join his army, and at everytation gave fresh orders to accelerate the movement of his troopsrom west to east. He went in a traveling coach with six horses,urrounded by pages, aides-de-camp, and an escort, along the road toosen, Thorn, Danzig, and Konigsberg. At each of these towns thousandsf people met him with excitement and enthusiasm.
	The army was moving from west to east, and relays of six horsesarried him in the same direction. On the tenth of June,* coming upith the army, he spent the night in apartments prepared for him onhe estate of a Polish count in the Vilkavisski forest.
	*Old style.
	Next day, overtaking the army, he went in a carriage to theiemen, and, changing into a Polish uniform, he drove to the riverbankn order to select a place for the crossing.
	Seeing, on the other side, some Cossacks (les Cosaques) and theide-spreading steppes in the midst of which lay the holy city ofoscow (Moscou, la ville sainte), the capital of a realm such as thecythia into which Alexander the Great had marched- Napoleonnexpectedly, and contrary alike to strategic and diplomaticonsiderations, ordered an advance, and the next day his army began toross the Niemen.
	Early in the morning of the twelfth of June he came out of his tent,hich was pitched that day on the steep left bank of the Niemen, andooked through a spyglass at the streams of his troops pouring outf the Vilkavisski forest and flowing over the three bridges throwncross the river. The troops, knowing of the Emperor's presence,ere on the lookout for him, and when they caught sight of a figure inn overcoat and a cocked hat standing apart from his suite in front ofis tent on the hill, they threw up their caps and shouted: "Vive'Empereur!" and one after another poured in a ceaseless stream out ofhe vast forest that had concealed them and, separating, flowed on andn by the three bridges to the other side.
	"Now we'll go into action. Oh, when he takes it in hand himself,hings get hot... by heaven!... There he is!... Vive l'Empereur! Sohese are the steppes of Asia! It's a nasty country all the same. Auevoir, Beauche; I'll keep the best palace in Moscow for you! Auevoir. Good luck!... Did you see the Emperor? Vive l'Empereur!...reur!- If they make me Governor of India, Gerard, I'll make youinister of Kashmir- that's settled. Vive l'Empereur! Hurrah!urrah! hurrah! The Cossacks- those rascals- see how they run! Vive'Empereur! There he is, do you see him? I've seen him twice, as I seeou now. The little corporal... I saw him give the cross to one of theeterans.... Vive l'Empereur!" came the voices of men, old andoung, of most diverse characters and social positions. On the facesf all was one common expression of joy at the commencement of theong-expected campaign and of rapture and devotion to the man in theray coat who was standing on the hill.
	On the thirteenth of June a rather small, thoroughbred Arab horseas brought to Napoleon. He mounted it and rode at a gallop to onef the bridges over the Niemen, deafened continually by incessantnd rapturous acclamations which he evidently endured only becauset was impossible to forbid the soldiers to express their love ofim by such shouting, but the shouting which accompanied himverywhere disturbed him and distracted him from the military careshat had occupied him from the time he joined the army. He rode acrossne of the swaying pontoon bridges to the farther side, turned sharplyo the left, and galloped in the direction of Kovno, preceded bynraptured, mounted chasseurs of the Guard who, breathless withelight, galloped ahead to clear a path for him through the troops. Oneaching the broad river Viliya, he stopped near a regiment ofolish Uhlans stationed by the river.
	"Vivat!" shouted the Poles, ecstatically, breaking their ranks andressing against one another to see him.
	Napoleon looked up and down the river, dismounted, and sat down on aog that lay on the bank. At a mute sign from him, a telescope wasanded him which he rested on the back of a happy page who had runp to him, and he gazed at the opposite bank. Then he becamebsorbed in a map laid out on the logs. Without lifting his head heaid something, and two of his aides-de-camp galloped off to theolish Uhlans.
	"What? What did he say?" was heard in the ranks of the Polish Uhlanshen one of the aides-de-camp rode up to them.
	The order was to find a ford and to cross the river. The colonelf the Polish Uhlans, a handsome old man, flushed and, fumbling in hispeech from excitement, asked the aide-de-camp whether he would beermitted to swim the river with his Uhlans instead of seeking a ford.n evident fear of refusal, like a boy asking for permission to get on horse, he begged to be allowed to swim across the river before themperor's eyes. The aide-de-camp replied that probably the Emperorould not be displeased at this excess of zeal.
	As soon as the aide-de-camp had said this, the old mustachedfficer, with happy face and sparkling eyes, raised his saber, shoutedVivat!" and, commanding the Uhlans to follow him, spurred his horsend galloped into the river. He gave an angry thrust to his horse,hich had grown restive under him, and plunged into the water, headingor the deepest part where the current was swift. Hundreds of Uhlansalloped in after him. It was cold and uncanny in the rapid current inhe middle of the stream, and the Uhlans caught hold of one another ashey fell off their horses. Some of the horses were drowned and somef the men; the others tried to swim on, some in the saddle and somelinging to their horses' manes. They tried to make their wayorward to the opposite bank and, though there was a ford one third of mile away, were proud that they were swimming and drowning in thisiver under the eyes of the man who sat on the log and was not evenooking at what they were doing. When the aide-de-camp, havingeturned and choosing an opportune moment, ventured to draw themperor's attention to the devotion of the Poles to his person, theittle man in the gray overcoat got up and, having summonederthier, began pacing up and down the bank with him, giving himnstructions and occasionally glancing disapprovingly at therowning Uhlans who distracted his attention.
	For him it was no new conviction that his presence in any part ofhe world, from Africa to the steppes of Muscovy alike, was enougho dumfound people and impel them to insane self-oblivion. He calledor his horse and rode to his quarters.
	Some forty Uhlans were drowned in the river, though boats wereent to their assistance. The majority struggled back to the bank fromhich they had started. The colonel and some of his men got across andith difficulty clambered out on the further bank. And as soon as theyad got out, in their soaked and streaming clothes, they shoutedVivat!" and looked ecstatically at the spot where Napoleon had beenut where he no longer was and at that moment considered themselvesappy.
	That evening, between issuing one order that the forged Russianaper money prepared for use in Russia should be delivered asuickly as possible and another that a Saxon should be shot, on whom aetter containing information about the orders to the French armyad been found, Napoleon also gave instructions that the Polisholonel who had needlessly plunged into the river should be enrolledn the Legion d'honneur of which Napoleon was himself the head.
	Quos vult perdere dementat.*
	*Those whom (God) wishes to destroy he drives mad.BK9|CH3
	CHAPTER III
	The Emperor of Russia had, meanwhile, been in Vilna for more than month. reviewing troops and holding maneuvers. Nothing was ready forhe war that everyone expected and to prepare for which the Emperorad come from Petersburg. There was no general plan of action. Theacillation between the various plans that were proposed had evenncreased after the Emperor had been at headquarters for a month. Eachf the three armies had its own commander in chief, but there was noupreme commander of all the forces, and the Emperor did not assumehat responsibility himself.
	The longer the Emperor remained in Vilna the less did everybody-ired of waiting- prepare for the war. All the efforts of those whourrounded the sovereign seemed directed merely to making him spendis time pleasantly and forget that war was impending.
	In June, after many balls and fetes given by the Polish magnates, byhe courtiers, and by the Emperor himself, it occurred to one of theolish aides-de-camp in attendance that a dinner and ball should beiven for the Emperor by his aides-de-camp. This idea was eagerlyeceived. The Emperor gave his consent. The aides-de-camp collectedoney by subscription. The lady who was thought to be most pleasing tohe Emperor was invited to act as hostess. Count Bennigsen, being aandowner in the Vilna province, offered his country house for theete, and the thirteenth of June was fixed for a ball, dinner,egatta, and fireworks at Zakret, Count Bennigsen's country seat.
	The very day that Napoleon issued the order to cross the Niemen, andis vanguard, driving off the Cossacks, crossed the Russianrontier, Alexander spent the evening at the entertainment given byis aides-de-camp at Bennigsen's country house.
	It was a gay and brilliant fete. Connoisseurs of such matterseclared that rarely had so many beautiful women been assembled in onelace. Countess Bezukhova was present among other Russian ladies whoad followed the sovereign from Petersburg to Vilna and eclipsed theefined Polish ladies by her massive, so called Russian type ofeauty. The Emperor noticed her and honored her with a dance.
	Boris Drubetskoy, having left his wife in Moscow and being for theresent en garcon (as he phrased it), was also there and, though notn aide-de-camp, had subscribed a large sum toward the expenses. Borisas now a rich man who had risen to high honors and no longer soughtatronage but stood on an equal footing with the highest of those ofis own age. He was meeting Helene in Vilna after not having seener for a long time and did not recall the past, but as Helene wasnjoying the favors of a very important personage and Boris had onlyecently married, they met as good friends of long standing.
	At midnight dancing was still going on. Helene, not having auitable partner, herself offered to dance the mazurka with Boris.hey were the third couple. Boris, coolly looking at Helene's dazzlingare shoulders which emerged from a dark, gold-embroidered, gauzeown, talked to her of old acquaintances and at the same time, unawaref it himself and unnoticed by others, never for an instant ceasedo observe the Emperor who was in the same room. The Emperor was notancing, he stood in the doorway, stopping now one pair and nownother with gracious words which he alone knew how to utter.
	As the mazurka began, Boris saw that Adjutant General Balashev,ne of those in closest attendance on the Emperor, went up to himnd contrary to court etiquette stood near him while he was talking to Polish lady. Having finished speaking to her, the Emperor lookednquiringly at Balashev and, evidently understanding that he onlycted thus because there were important reasons for so doing, noddedlightly to the lady and turned to him. Hardly had Balashev begun topeak before a look of amazement appeared on the Emperor's face. Heook Balashev by the arm and crossed the room with him,nconsciously clearing a path seven yards wide as the people on bothides made way for him. Boris noticed Arakcheev's excited face whenhe sovereign went out with Balashev. Arakcheev looked at themperor from under his brow and, sniffing with his red nose, steppedorward from the crowd as if expecting the Emperor to address him.Boris understood that Arakcheev envied Balashev and was displeasedhat evidently important news had reached the Emperor otherwise thanhrough himself.)
	But the Emperor and Balashev passed out into the illuminatedarden without noticing Arakcheev who, holding his sword andlancing wrathfully around, followed some twenty paces behind them.
	All the time Boris was going through the figures of the mazurka,e was worried by the question of what news Balashev had brought andow he could find it out before others. In the figure in which head to choose two ladies, he whispered to Helene that he meant tohoose Countess Potocka who, he thought, had gone out onto theeranda, and glided over the parquet to the door opening into thearden, where, seeing Balashev and the Emperor returning to theeranda, he stood still. They were moving toward the door. Boris,luttering as if he had not had time to withdraw, respectfully pressedlose to the doorpost with bowed head.
	The Emperor, with the agitation of one who has been personallyffronted, was finishing with these words:
	"To enter Russia without declaring war! I will not make peace asong as a single armed enemy remains in my country!" It seemed tooris that it gave the Emperor pleasure to utter these words. He wasatisfied with the form in which he had expressed his thoughts, butispleased that Boris had overheard it.
	"Let no one know of it! " the Emperor added with a frown.
	Boris understood that this was meant for him and, closing hisyes, slightly bowed his head. The Emperor re-entered the ballroom andemained there about another half-hour.
	Boris was thus the first to learn the news that the French armyad crossed the Niemen and, thanks to this, was able to show certainmportant personages that much that was concealed from others wassually known to him, and by this means he rose higher in theirstimation.
	The unexpected news of the French having crossed the Niemen wasarticularly startling after a month of unfulfilled expectations,nd at a ball. On first receiving the news, under the influence ofndignation and resentment the Emperor had found a phrase that pleasedim, fully expressed his feelings, and has since become famous. Oneturning home at two o'clock that night he sent for his secretary,hishkov, and told him to write an order to the troops and aescript to Field Marshal Prince Saltykov, in which he insisted on theords being inserted that he would not make peace so long as aingle armed Frenchman remained on Russian soil.
	Next day the following letter was sent to Napoleon:
	Monsieur mon frere,
	Yesterday I learned that, despite the loyalty which I have kept myngagements with Your Majesty, your troops have crossed the Russianrontier, and I have this moment received from Petersburg a note, inhich Count Lauriston informs me, as a reason for this aggression,hat Your Majesty has considered yourself to be in a state of war withe from the time Prince Kuragin asked for his passports. The reasonsn which the Duc de Bassano based his refusal to deliver them to himould never have led me to suppose that that could serve as aretext for aggression. In fact, the ambassador, as he himself haseclared, was never authorized to make that demand, and as soon as Ias informed of it I let him know how much I disapproved of it andrdered him to remain at his post. If Your Majesty does not intendo shed the blood of our peoples for such a misunderstanding, andonsents to withdraw your troops from Russian territory, I will regardhat has passed as not having occurred and an understanding between usill be possible. In the contrary case, Your Majesty, I shall seeyself forced to repel an attack that nothing on my part has provoked.t still depends on Your Majesty to preserve humanity from thealamity of another war. I am, etc.,
	                                         (signed) AlexanderBK9|CH4
	CHAPTER IV
	At two in the morning of the fourteenth of June, the Emperor, havingent for Balashev and read him his letter to Napoleon, ordered himo take it and hand it personally to the French Emperor. Whenispatching Balashev, the Emperor repeated to him the words that heould not make peace so long as a single armed enemy remained onussian soil and told him to transmit those words to Napoleon.lexander did not insert them in his letter to Napoleon, becauseith his characteristic tact he felt it would be injudicious to usehem at a moment when a last attempt at reconciliation was being made,ut he definitely instructed Balashev to repeat them personally toapoleon.
	Having set off in the small hours of the fourteenth, accompaniedy a bugler and two Cossacks, Balashev reached the French outpostst the village of Rykonty, on the Russian side of the Niemen, by dawn.here he was stopped by French cavalry sentinels.
	A French noncommissioned officer of hussars, in crimson uniformnd a shaggy cap, shouted to the approaching Balashev to halt.alashev did not do so at once, but continued to advance along theoad at a walking pace.
	The noncommissioned officer frowned and, muttering words of abuse,dvanced his horse's chest against Balashev, put his hand to hisaber, and shouted rudely at the Russian general, asking: was heeaf that he did not do as he was told? Balashev mentioned who he was.he noncommissioned officer began talking with his comrades aboutegimental matters without looking at the Russian general.
	After living at the seat of the highest authority and power, afteronversing with the Emperor less than three hours before, and ineneral being accustomed to the respect due to his rank in theervice, Balashev found it very strange here on Russian soil toncounter this hostile, and still more this disrespectful, applicationf brute force to himself.
	The sun was only just appearing from behind the clouds, the airas fresh and dewy. A herd of cattle was being driven along the roadrom the village, and over the fields the larks rose trilling, onefter another, like bubbles rising in water.
	Balashev looked around him, awaiting the arrival of an officerrom the village. The Russian Cossacks and bugler and the Frenchussars looked silently at one another from time to time.
	A French colonel of hussars, who had evidently just left his bed,ame riding from the village on a handsome sleek gray horse,ccompanied by two hussars. The officer, the soldiers, and theirorses all looked smart and well kept.
	It was that first period of a campaign when troops are still in fullrim, almost like that of peacetime maneuvers, but with a shade ofartial swagger in their clothes, and a touch of the gaiety and spiritf enterprise which always accompany the opening of a campaign.
	The French colonel with difficulty repressed a yawn, but wasolite and evidently understood Balashev's importance. He led him pastis soldiers and behind the outposts and told him that his wish toe presented to the Emperor would most likely be satisfiedmmediately, as the Emperor's quarters were, he believed, not far off.
	They rode through the village of Rykonty, past tethered Frenchussar horses, past sentinels and men who saluted their colonel andtared with curiosity at a Russian uniform, and came out at thether end of the village. The colonel said that the commander of theivision was a mile and a quarter away and would receive Balashevnd conduct him to his destination.
	The sun had by now risen and shone gaily on the bright verdure.
	They had hardly ridden up a hill, past a tavern, before they saw aroup of horsemen coming toward them. In front of the group, on alack horse with trappings that glittered in the sun, rode a tallan with plumes in his hat and black hair curling down to hishoulders. He wore a red mantle, and stretched his long legs forwardn French fashion. This man rode toward Balashev at a gallop, hislumes flowing and his gems and gold lace glittering in the brightune sunshine.
	Balashev was only two horses' length from the equestrian with theracelets, plunies, necklaces, and gold embroidery, who wasalloping toward him with a theatrically solemn countenance, whenulner, the French colonel, whispered respectfully: "The King ofaples!" It was, in fact, Murat, now called "King of Naples." Thought was quite incomprehensible why he should be King of Naples, heas called so, and was himself convinced that he was so, and thereforessumed a more solemn and important air than formerly. He was soure that he really was the King of Naples that when, on the eve ofis departure from that city, while walking through the streets withis wife, some Italians called out to him: "Viva il re!"* he turned tois wife with a pensive smile and said: "Poor fellows, they don't knowhat I am leaving them tomorrow!"
	*"Long live the king."
	But though he firmly believed himself to be King of Naples anditied the grief felt by the subjects he was abandoning, latterly,fter he had been ordered to return to military service- andspecially since his last interview with Napoleon in Danzig, whenis august brother-in-law had told him: "I made you King that youhould reign in my way, but not in yours!"- he had cheerfully taken upis familiar business, and- like a well-fed but not overfat horse thateels himself in harness and grows skittish between the shafts- heressed up in clothes as variegated and expensive as possible, andaily and contentedly galloped along the roads of Poland, withoutimself knowing why or whither.
	On seeing the Russian general he threw back his head, with itsong hair curling to his shoulders, in a majestically royal manner,nd looked inquiringly at the French colonel. The colonel respectfullynformed His Majesty of Balashev's mission, whose name he could notronounce.
	"De Bal-macheve!" said the King (overcoming by his assurance theifficulty that had presented itself to the colonel). "Charmed to makeour acquaintance, General!" he added, with a gesture of kinglyondescension.
	As soon as the King began to speak loud and fast his royal dignitynstantly forsook him, and without noticing it he passed into hisatural tone of good-natured familiarity. He laid his hand on theithers of Balashev's horse and said:
	"Well, General, it all looks like war," as if regretting aircumstance of which he was unable to judge.
	"Your Majesty," replied Balashev, "my master, the Emperor, doesot desire war and as Your Majesty sees..." said Balashev, using theords Your Majesty at every opportunity, with the affectationnavoidable in frequently addressing one to whom the title was still aovelty.
	Murat's face beamed with stupid satisfaction as he listened toMonsieur de Bal-macheve." But royaute oblige!* and he felt itncumbent on him, as a king and an ally, to confer on state affairsith Alexander's envoy. He dismounted, took Balashev's arm, and moving few steps away from his suite, which waited respectfully, began toace up and down with him, trying to speak significantly. Heeferred to the fact that the Emperor Napoleon had resented the demandhat he should withdraw his troops from Prussia, especially whenhat demand became generally known and the dignity of France washereby offended.
	*"Royalty has its obligations."
	Balashev replied that there was nothing offensive in the demand,ecause..." but Murat interrupted him.
	"Then you don't consider the Emperor Alexander the aggressor?" hesked unexpectedly, with a kindly and foolish smile.
	Balashev told him why he considered Napoleon to be the originator ofhe war.
	"Oh, my dear general!" Murat again interrupted him, "with all myeart I wish the Emperors may arrange the affair between them, andhat the war begun by no wish of mine may finish as quickly asossible!" said he, in the tone of a servant who wants to remainood friends with another despite a quarrel between their masters.
	And he went on to inquiries about the Grand Duke and the state ofis health, and to reminiscences of the gay and amusing times he hadpent with him in Naples. Then suddenly, as if remembering his royalignity, Murat solemnly drew himself up, assumed the pose in whiche had stood at his coronation. and, waving his right arm, said:
	"I won't detain you longer, General. I wish success to yourission," and with his embroidered red mantle, his flowing feathers,nd his glittering ornaments, he rejoined his suite who wereespectfully awaiting him.
	Balashev rode on, supposing from Murat's words that he would veryoon be brought before Napoleon himself. But instead of that, at theext village the sentinels of Davout's infantry corps detained hims the pickets of the vanguard had done, and an adjutant of theorps commander, who was fetched, conducted him into the village toarshal Davout.BK9|CH5
	CHAPTER V
	Davout was to Napoleon what Arakcheev was to Alexander- though not aoward like Arakcheev, he was as precise, as cruel, and as unable toxpress his devotion to his monarch except by cruelty.
	In the organism of states such men are necessary, as wolves areecessary in the organism of nature, and they always exist, alwaysppear and hold their own, however incongruous their presence andheir proximity to the head of the government may be. Thisnevitability alone can explain how the cruel Arakcheev, who toreut a grenadier's mustache with his own hands, whose weak nervesendered him unable to face danger, and who was neither an educatedan nor a courtier, was able to maintain his powerful position withlexander, whose own character was chivalrous, noble, and gentle.
	Balashev found Davout seated on a barrel in the shed of aeasant's hut, writing- he was auditing accounts. Better quartersould have been found him, but Marshal Davout was one of those men whourposely put themselves in most depressing conditions to have austification for being gloomy. For the same reason they are alwaysard at work and in a hurry. "How can I think of the bright side ofife when, as you see, I am sitting on a barrel and working in a dirtyhed?" the expression of his face seemed to say. The chief pleasurend necessity of such men, when they encounter anyone who showsnimation, is to flaunt their own dreary, persistent activity.avout allowed himself that pleasure when Balashev was brought in.e became still more absorbed in his task when the Russian generalntered, and after glancing over his spectacles at Balashev's face,hich was animated by the beauty of the morning and by his talk withurat, he did not rise or even stir, but scowled still more andneered malevolently.
	When he noticed in Balashev's face the disagreeable impressionhis reception produced, Davout raised his head and coldly askedhat he wanted.
	Thinking he could have been received in such a manner only becauseavout did not know that he was adjutant general to the Emperorlexander and even his envoy to Napoleon, Balashev hastened tonform him of his rank and mission. Contrary to his expectation,avout, after hearing him, became still surlier and ruder.
	"Where is your dispatch?" he inquired. "Give it to me. I will sendt to the Emperor."
	Balashev replied that he had been ordered to hand it personally tohe Emperor.
	"Your Emperor's orders are obeyed in your army, but here," saidavout, "you must do as you're told."
	And, as if to make the Russian general still more conscious of hisependence on brute force, Davout sent an adjutant to call the officern duty.
	Balashev took out the packet containing the Emperor's letter andaid it on the table (made of a door with its hinges still hangingn it, laid across two barrels). Davout took the packet and read thenscription.
	"You are perfectly at liberty to treat me with respect or not,"rotested Balashev, "but permit me to observe that I have the honor toe adjutant general to His Majesty...."
	Davout glanced at him silently and plainly derived pleasure from theigns of agitation and confusion which appeared on Balashev's face.
	"You will be treated as is fitting," said he and, putting the packetn his pocket, left the shed.
	A minute later the marshal's adjutant, de Castres, came in andonducted Balashev to the quarters assigned him.
	That day he dined with the marshal, at the same board on thearrels.
	Next day Davout rode out early and, after asking Balashev to come toim, peremptorily requested him to remain there, to move on with theaggage train should orders come for it to move, and to talk to no onexcept Monsieur de Castres.
	After four days of solitude, ennui, and consciousness of hismpotence and insignificance- particularly acute by contrast withhe sphere of power in which he had so lately moved- and after severalarches with the marshal's baggage and the French army, which occupiedhe whole district, Balashev was brought to Vilna- now occupied by therench- through the very gate by which he had left it four daysreviously.
	Next day the imperial gentleman-in-waiting, the Comte de Turenne,ame to Balashev and informed him of the Emperor Napoleon's wish toonor him with an audience.
	Four days before, sentinels of the Preobrazhensk regiment hadtood in front of the house to which Balashev was conducted, and nowwo French grenadiers stood there in blue uniforms unfastened in frontnd with shaggy caps on their heads, and an escort of hussars andhlans and a brilliant suite of aides-de-camp, pages, and generals,ho were waiting for Napoleon to come out, were standing at the porch,ound his saddle horse and his Mameluke, Rustan. Napoleon receivedalashev in the very house in Vilna from which Alexander hadispatched him on his mission.BK9|CH6
	CHAPTER VI
	Though Balashev was used to imperial pomp, he was amazed at theuxury and magnificence of Napoleon's court.
	The Comte de Turenne showed him into a big reception room where manyenerals, gentlemen-in-waiting, and Polish magnates- several of whomalashev had seen at the court of the Emperor of Russia- were waiting.uroc said that Napoleon would receive the Russian general beforeoing for his ride.
	After some minutes, the gentleman-in-waiting who was on duty camento the great reception room and, bowing politely, asked Balashevo follow him.
	Balashev went into a small reception room, one door of which lednto a study, the very one from which the Russian Emperor hadispatched him on his mission. He stood a minute or two, waiting. Heeard hurried footsteps beyond the door, both halves of it were openedapidly; all was silent and then from the study the sound was heard ofther steps, firm and resolute- they were those of Napoleon. He hadust finished dressing for his ride, and wore a blue uniform,pening in front over a white waistcoat so long that it covered hisotund stomach, white leather breeches tightly fitting the fathighs of his short legs, and Hessian boots. His short hair hadvidently just been brushed, but one lock hung down in the middle ofis broad forehead. His plump white neck stood out sharply above thelack collar of his uniform, and he smelled of Eau de Cologne. Hisull face, rather young-looking, with its prominent chin, wore aracious and majestic expression of imperial welcome.
	He entered briskly, with a jerk at every step and his headlightly thrown back. His whole short corpulent figure with broadhick shoulders, and chest and stomach involuntarily protruding, hadhat imposing and stately appearance one sees in men of forty who liven comfort. It was evident, too, that he was in the best of spiritshat day.
	He nodded in answer to Balashav's low and respectful bow, and comingp to him at once began speaking like a man who values every moment ofis time and does not condescend to prepare what he has to say buts sure he will always say the right thing and say it well.
	"Good day, General!" said he. "I have received the letter yourought from the Emperor Alexander and am very glad to see you." Helanced with his large eyes into Balashav's face and immediatelyooked past him.
	It was plain that Balashev's personality did not interest him atll. Evidently only what took place within his own mind interestedim. Nothing outside himself had any significance for him, becauseverything in the world, it seemed to him, depended entirely on hisill.
	"I do not, and did not, desire war," he continued, "but it haseen forced on me. Even now" (he emphasized the word) "I am ready toeceive any explanations you can give me."
	And he began clearly and concisely to explain his reasons forissatisfaction with the Russian government. Judging by the calmlyoderate and amicable tone in which the French Emperor spoke, Balashevas firmly persuaded that he wished for peace and intended to enternto negotiations.
	When Napoleon, having finished speaking, looked inquiringly at theussian envoy, Balashev began a speech he had prepared long before:Sire! The Emperor, my master..." but the sight of the Emperor'syes bent on him confused him. "You are flurried- compose yourself!"apoleon seemed to say, as with a scarcely perceptible smile he lookedt Balashev's uniform and sword.
	Balashev recovered himself and began to speak. He said that themperor Alexander did not consider Kurakin's demand for hisassports a sufficient cause for war; that Kurakin had acted on hiswn initiative and without his sovereign's assent, that the Emperorlexander did not desire war, and had no relations with England.
	"Not yet!" interposed Napoleon, and, as if fearing to give vent tois feelings, he frowned and nodded slightly as a sign that Balashevight proceed.
	After saying all he had been instructed to say, Balashev addedhat the Emperor Alexander wished for peace, but would not enternto negotiations except on condition that... Here Balashev hesitated:e remembered the words the Emperor Alexander had not written in hisetter, but had specially inserted in the rescript to Saltykov and hadold Balashev to repeat to Napoleon. Balashev remembered theseords, "So long as a single armed foe remains on Russian soil," butome complex feeling restrained him. He could not utter them, thoughe wished to do so. He grew confused and said: "On condition thathe French army retires beyond the Niemen."
	Napoleon noticed Balashev's embarrassment when uttering these lastords; his face twitched and the calf of his left leg began touiver rhythmically. Without moving from where he stood he beganpeaking in a louder tone and more hurriedly than before. During thepeech that followed, Balashev, who more than once lowered his eyes,nvoluntarily noticed the quivering of Napoleon's left leg whichncreased the more Napoleon raised his voice.
	"I desire peace, no less than the Emperor Alexander," he began.Have I not for eighteen months been doing everything to obtain it? have waited eighteen months for explanations. But in order toegin negotiations, what is demanded of me?" he said, frowning andaking an energetic gesture of inquiry with his small white plumpand.
	"The withdrawal of your army beyond the Niemen, sire," repliedalashev.
	"The Niemen?" repeated Napoleon. "So now you want me to retireeyond the Niemen- only the Niemen?" repeated Napoleon, lookingtraight at Balashev.
	The latter bowed his head respectfully.
	Instead of the demand of four months earlier to withdraw fromomerania, only a withdrawal beyond the Niemen was now demanded.apoleon turned quickly and began to pace the room.
	"You say the demand now is that I am to withdraw beyond the Niemenefore commencing negotiations, but in just the same way two monthsgo the demand was that I should withdraw beyond the Vistula and theder, and yet you are willing to negotiate."
	He went in silence from one corner of the room to the other andgain stopped in front of Balashev. Balashev noticed that his left legas quivering faster than before and his face seemed petrified ints stern expression. This quivering of his left leg was a thingapoleon was conscious of. "The vibration of my left calf is a greatign with me," he remarked at a later date.
	"Such demands as to retreat beyond the Vistula and Oder may beade to a Prince of Baden, but not to me!" Napoleon almost screamed,uite to his own surprise. "If you gave me Petersburg and Moscow Iould not accept such conditions. You say I have begun this war! Butho first joined his army? The Emperor Alexander, not I! And you offere negotiations when I have expended millions, when you are inlliance with England, and when your position is a bad one. Youffer me negotiations! But what is the aim of your alliance withngland? What has she given you?" he continued hurriedly, evidently noonger trying to show the advantages of peace and discuss itsossibility, but only to prove his own rectitude and power andlexander's errors and duplicity.
	The commencement of his speech had obviously been made with thentention of demonstrating the advantages of his position andhowing that he was nevertheless willing to negotiate. But he hadegun talking, and the more he talked the less could he control hisords.
	The whole purport of his remarks now was evidently to exaltimself and insult Alexander- just what he had least desired at theommencement of the interview.
	"I hear you have made peace with Turkey?"
	Balashev bowed his head affirmatively.
	"Peace has been concluded..." he began.
	But Napoleon did not let him speak. He evidently wanted to do allhe talking himself, and continued to talk with the sort ofloquence and unrestrained irritability to which spoiled people are sorone.
	"Yes, I know you have made peace with the Turks without obtainingoldavia and Wallachia; I would have given your sovereign thoserovinces as I gave him Finland. Yes," he went on, "I promised andould have given the Emperor Alexander Moldavia and Wallachia, and nowe won't have those splendid provinces. Yet he might have unitedhem to his empire and in a single reign would have extended Russiarom the Gulf of Bothnia to the mouths of the Danube. Catherine thereat could not have done more," said Napoleon, growing more andore excited as he paced up and down the room, repeating to Balashevlmost the very words he had used to Alexander himself at Tilsit. "Allhat, he would have owed to my friendship. Oh, what a splendid reign!"e repeated several times, then paused, drew from his pocket a goldnuffbox, lifted it to his nose, and greedily sniffed at it.
	"What a splendid reign the Emperor Alexander's might have been!"
	He looked compassionately at Balashev, and as soon as the latterried to make some rejoinder hastily interrupted him.
	"What could he wish or look for that he would not have obtainedhrough my friendship?" demanded Napoleon, shrugging his shouldersn perplexity. "But no, he has preferred to surround himself with mynemies, and with whom? With Steins, Armfeldts, Bennigsens, andintzingerodes! Stein, a traitor expelled from his own country;rmfeldt, a rake and an intriguer; Wintzingerode, a fugitive Frenchubject; Bennigsen, rather more of a soldier than the others, butll the same an incompetent who was unable to do anything in 1807nd who should awaken terrible memories in the Emperor Alexander'sind.... Granted that were they competent they might be made usef," continued Napoleon- hardly able to keep pace in words with theush of thoughts that incessantly sprang up, proving how right andtrong he was (in his perception the two were one and the same)-but they are not even that! They are neither fit for war nor peace!arclay is said to be the most capable of them all, but I cannot sayo, judging by his first movements. And what are they doing, all theseourtiers? Pfuel proposes, Armfeldt disputes, Bennigsen considers, andarclay, called on to act, does not know what to decide on, and timeasses bringing no result. Bagration alone is a military man. He'stupid, but he has experience, a quick eye, and resolution.... Andhat role is your young monarch playing in that monstrous crowd?hey compromise him and throw on him the responsibility for all thatappens. A sovereign should not be with the army unless he is aeneral!" said Napoleon, evidently uttering these words as a directhallenge to the Emperor. He knew how Alexander desired to be ailitary commander.
	"The campaign began only a week ago, and you haven't even beenble to defend Vilna. You are cut in two and have been driven out ofhe Polish provinces. Your army is grumbling."
	"On the contrary, Your Majesty," said Balashev, hardly able toemember what had been said to him and following these verbalireworks with difficulty, "the troops are burning with eagerness..."
	"I know everything!" Napoleon interrupted him. "I know everything. Inow the number of your battalions as exactly as I know my own. Youave not two hundred thousand men, and I have three times that number. give you my word of honor," said Napoleon, forgetting that hisord of honor could carry no weight- "I give you my word of honor that have five hundred and thirty thousand men this side of theistula. The Turks will be of no use to you; they are worth nothingnd have shown it by making peace with you. As for the Swedes- it isheir fate to be governed by mad kings. Their king was insane and theyhanged him for another- Bernadotte, who promptly went mad- for nowede would ally himself with Russia unless he were mad."
	Napoleon grinned maliciously and again raised his snuffbox to hisose.
	Balashev knew how to reply to each of Napoleon's remarks, andould have done so; he continually made the gesture of a man wishingo say something, but Napoleon always interrupted him. To thelleged insanity of the Swedes, Balashev wished to reply that whenussia is on her side Sweden is practically an island: but Napoleonave an angry exclamation to drown his voice. Napoleon was in thattate of irritability in which a man has to talk, talk, and talk,erely to convince himself that he is in the right. Balashev begano feel uncomfortable: as envoy he feared to demean his dignity andelt the necessity of replying; but, as a man, he shrank before theransport of groundless wrath that had evidently seized Napoleon. Henew that none of the words now uttered by Napoleon had anyignificance, and that Napoleon himself would be ashamed of themhen he came to his senses. Balashev stood with downcast eyes, lookingt the movements of Napoleon's stout legs and trying to avoideeting his eyes.
	"But what do I care about your allies?" said Napoleon. "I havellies- the Poles. There are eighty thousand of them and they fightike lions. And there will be two hundred thousand of them."
	And probably still more perturbed by the fact that he had utteredhis obvious falsehood, and that Balashev still stood silentlyefore him in the same attitude of submission to fate, Napoleonbruptly turned round, drew close to Balashev's face, and,esticulating rapidly and energetically with his white hands, almosthouted:
	"Know that if you stir up Prussia against me, I'll wipe it off theap of Europe!" he declared, his face pale and distorted by anger, ande struck one of his small hands energetically with the other. "Yes, Iill throw you back beyond the Dvina and beyond the Dnieper, andill re-erect against you that barrier which it was criminal and blindf Europe to allow to be destroyed. Yes, that is what will happen toou. That is what you have gained by alienating me!" And he walkedilently several times up and down the room, his fat shoulderswitching.
	He put his snuffbox into his waistcoat pocket, took it out again,ifted it several times to his nose, and stopped in front of Balashev.e paused, looked ironically straight into Balashev's eyes, and saidn a quiet voice:
	"And yet what a splendid reign your master might have had!"
	Balashev, feeling it incumbent on him to reply, said that from theussian side things did not appear in so gloomy a light. Napoleonas silent, still looking derisively at him and evidently notistening to him. Balashev said that in Russia the best results werexpected from the war. Napoleon nodded condescendingly, as if toay, "I know it's your duty to say that, but you don't believe itourself. I have convinced you."
	When Balashev had ended, Napoleon again took out his snuffbox,niffed at it, and stamped his foot twice on the floor as a signal.he door opened, a gentleman-in-waiting, bending respectfully,anded the Emperor his hat and gloves; another brought hima pocketandkerchief. Napoleon, without giving them a glance, turned toalashev:
	"Assure the Emperor Alexander from me," said he, taking his hat,that I am as devoted to him as before: I know him thoroughly and veryighly esteem his lofty qualities. I will detain you no longer,eneral; you shall receive my letter to the Emperor."
	And Napoleon went quickly to the door. Everyone in the receptionoom rushed forward and descended the staircase.BK9|CH7
	CHAPTER VII
	After all that Napoleon had said to him- those bursts of anger andhe last dryly spoken words: "I will detain you no longer, General;ou shall receive my letter," Balashev felt convinced that Napoleonould not wish to see him, and would even avoid another meeting withim- an insulted envoy- especially as he had witnessed his unseemlynger. But, to his surprise, Balashev received, through Duroc, annvitation to dine with the Emperor that day.
	Bessieres, Caulaincourt, and Berthier were present at that dinner.
	Napoleon met Balashev cheerfully and amiably. He not only showedo sign of constraint or self-reproach on account of his outburst thatorning, but, on the contrary, tried to reassure Balashev. It wasvident that he had long been convinced that it was impossible for himo make a mistake, and that in his perception whatever he did wasight, not because it harmonized with any idea of right and wrong, butecause he did it.
	The Emperor was in very good spirits after his ride through Vilna,here crowds of people had rapturously greeted and followed him.rom all the windows of the streets through which he rode, rugs,lags, and his monogram were displayed, and the Polish ladies,elcoming him, waved their handkerchiefs to him.
	At dinner, having placed Balashev beside him, Napoleon not onlyreated him amiably but behaved as if Balashev were one of his ownourtiers, one of those who sympathized with his plans and ought toejoice at his success. In the course of conversation he mentionedoscow and questioned Balashev about the Russian capital, not merelys an interested traveler asks about a new city he intends to visit,ut as if convinced that Balashev, as a Russian, must be flatteredy his curiosity.
	"How many inhabitants are there in Moscow? How many houses? Is itrue that Moscow is called 'Holy Moscow'? How many churches arehere in Moscow?" he asked.
	And receiving the reply that there were more than two hundredhurches, he remarked:
	"Why such a quantity of churches?"
	"The Russians are very devout," replied Balashev.
	"But a large number of monasteries and churches is always a signf the backwardness of a people," said Napoleon, turning toaulaincourt for appreciation of this remark.
	Balashev respectfully ventured to disagree with the French Emperor.
	"Every country has its own character," said he.
	"But nowhere in Europe is there anything like that," said Napoleon.
	"I beg your Majesty's pardon," returned Balashev, "besides Russiahere is Spain, where there are also many churches and monasteries."
	This reply of Balashev's, which hinted at the recent defeats ofhe French in Spain, was much appreciated when he related it atlexander's court, but it was not much appreciated at Napoleon'sinner, where it passed unnoticed.
	The uninterested and perplexed faces of the marshals showed thathey were puzzled as to what Balashev's tone suggested. "If there is aoint we don't see it, or it is not at all witty," their expressionseemed to say. So little was his rejoinder appreciated that Napoleonid not notice it at all and naively asked Balashev through what townshe direct road from there to Moscow passed. Balashev, who was onhe alert all through the dinner, replied that just as "all roads leado Rome," so all roads lead to Moscow: there were many roads, andamong them the road through Poltava, which Charles XII chose."alashev involuntarily flushed with pleasure at the aptitude of thiseply, but hardly had he uttered the word Poltava beforeaulaincourt began speaking of the badness of the road from Petersburgo Moscow and of his Petersburg reminiscences.
	After dinner they went to drink coffee in Napoleon's study, whichour days previously had been that of the Emperor Alexander.apoleon sat down, toying with his Sevres coffee cup, and motionedalashev to a chair beside him.
	Napoleon was in that well-known after-dinner mood which, more thanny reasoned cause, makes a man contented with himself and disposed toonsider everyone his friend. It seemed to him that he wasurrounded by men who adored him: and he felt convinced that, afteris dinner, Balashev too was his friend and worshiper. Napoleon turnedo him with a pleasant, though slightly ironic, smile.
	"They tell me this is the room the Emperor Alexander occupied?trange, isn't it, General?" he said, evidently not doubting that thisemark would be agreeable to his hearer since it went to prove his,apoleon's, superiority to Alexander.
	Balashev made no reply and bowed and bowed his head in silence.
	"Yes. Four days ago in this room, Wintzingerode and Stein wereeliberating," continued Napoleon with the same derisive andelf-confident smile. "What I can't understand," he went on, "ishat the Emperor Alexander has surrounded himself with my personalnemies. That I do not... understand. Has he not thought that I mayhe same?" and he turned inquiringly to Balashev, and evidently thishought turned him back on to the track of his morning's anger,hich was still fresh in him.
	"And let him know that I will do so!" said Napoleon, rising andushing his cup away with his hand. "I'll drive all his Wurttemberg,aden, and Weimar relations out of Germany.... Yes. I'll drive themut. Let him prepare an asylum for them in Russia!"
	Balashev bowed his head with an air indicating that he would like toake his bow and leave, and only listened because he could not helpearing what was said to him. Napoleon did not notice this expression;e treated Balashev not as an envoy from his enemy, but as a man nowully devoted to him and who must rejoice at his former master'sumiliation.
	"And why has the Emperor Alexander taken command of the armies? Whats the good of that? War is my profession, but his business is toeign and not to command armies! Why has he taken on himself such aesponsibility?"
	Again Napoleon brought out his snuffbox, paced several times upnd down the room in silence, and then, suddenly and unexpectedly,ent up to Balashev and with a slight smile, as confidently,uickly, and simply as if he were doing something not merelymportant but pleasing to Balashev, he raised his hand to theorty-year-old Russian general's face and, taking him by the ear,ulled it gently, smiling with his lips only.
	To have one's ear pulled by the Emperor was considered thereatest honor and mark of favor at the French court.
	"Well, adorer and courtier of the Emperor Alexander, why don't youay anything?" said he, as if it was ridiculous, in his presence, toe the adorer and courtier of anyone but himself, Napoleon. "Are theorses ready for the general?" he added, with a slight inclinationf his head in reply to Balashev's bow. "Let him have mine, he has aong way to go!"
	The letter taken by Balashev was the last Napoleon sent tolexander. Every detail of the interview was communicated to theussian monarch, and the war began...BK9|CH8
	CHAPTER VIII
	After his interview with Pierre in Moscow, Prince Andrew went toetersburg, on business as he told his family, but really to meetnatole Kuragin whom he felt it necessary to encounter. On reachingetersburg he inquired for Kuragin but the latter had already left theity. Pierre had warned his brother-in-law that Prince Andrew was onis track. Anatole Kuragin promptly obtained an appointment from theinister of War and went to join the army in Moldavia. While inetersburg Prince Andrew met Kutuzov, his former commander who waslways well disposed toward him, and Kutuzov suggested that hehould accompany him to the army in Moldavia, to which the old generalad been appointed commander in chief. So Prince Andrew, havingeceived an appointment on the headquarters staff, left for Turkey.
	Prince Andrew did not think it proper to write and challengeuragin. He thought that if he challenged him without some fresh causet might compromise the young Countess Rostova and so he wanted toeet Kuragin personally in order to find a fresh pretext for a duel.ut he again failed to meet Kuragin in Turkey, for soon after Princendrew arrived, the latter returned to Russia. In a new country,mid new conditions, Prince Andrew found life easier to bear. Afteris betrothed had broken faith with him- which he felt the morecutely the more he tried to conceal its effects- the surroundingsn which he had been happy became trying to him, and the freedom andndependence he had once prized so highly were still more so. Not onlyould he no longer think the thoughts that had first come to him as heay gazing at the sky on the field of Austerlitz and had laternlarged upon with Pierre, and which had filled his solitude atogucharovo and then in Switzerland and Rome, but he even dreaded toecall them and them and the bright and boundless horizons they hadevealed. He was now concerned only with the nearest practical mattersnrelated to his past interests, and he seized on these the moreagerly the more those past interests were closed to him. It was as ifhat lofty, infinite canopy of heaven that had once towered aboveim had suddenly turned into a low, solid vault that weighed him down,n which all was clear, but nothing eternal or mysterious.
	Of the activities that presented themselves to him, army service washe simplest and most familiar. As a general on duty on Kutuzov'staff, he applied himself to business with zeal and perseverance andurprised Kutuzov by his willingness and accuracy in work. Notaving found Kuragin in Turkey, Prince Andrew did not think itecessary to rush back to Russia after him, but all the same he knewhat however long it might be before he met Kuragin, despite hisontempt for him and despite all the proofs he deduced to convinceimself that it was not worth stooping to a conflict with him- he knewhat when he did meet him he would not be able to resist calling himut, any more than a ravenous man can help snatching at food. Andhe consciousness that the insult was not yet avenged, that his rancoras still unspent, weighed on his heart and poisoned the artificialranquillity which he managed to obtain in Turkey by means ofestless, plodding, and rather vainglorious and ambitious activity.
	In the year 1812, when news of the war with Napoleon reacheducharest- where Kutuzov had been living for two months, passing hisays and nights with a Wallachian woman- Prince Andrew asked Kutuzovo transfer him to the Western Army. Kutuzov, who was already weary ofolkonski's activity which seemed to reproach his own idleness, veryeadily let him go and gave him a mission to Barclay de Tolly.
	Before joining the Western Army which was then, in May, encampedt Drissa, Prince Andrew visited Bald Hills which was directly onis way, being only two miles off the Smolensk highroad. During theast three years there had been so many changes in his life, he hadhought, felt, and seen so much (having traveled both in the eastnd the west), that on reaching Bald Hills it struck him as strangend unexpected to find the way of life there unchanged and still theame in every detail. He entered through the gates with their stoneillars and drove up the avenue leading to the house as if he werentering an enchanted, sleeping castle. The same old stateliness,he same cleanliness, the same stillness reigned there, and insidehere was the same furniture, the same walls, sounds, and smell, andhe same timid faces, only somewhat older. Princess Mary was still theame timid, plain maiden getting on in years, uselessly andoylessly passing the best years of her life in fear and constantuffering. Mademoiselle Bourienne was the same coquettish,elf-satisfied girl, enjoying every moment of her existence and fullf joyous hopes for the future. She had merely become moreelf-confident, Prince Andrew thought. Dessalles, the tutor he hadrought from Switzerland, was wearing a coat of Russian cut andalking broken Russian to the servants, but was still the samearrowly intelligent, conscientious, and pedantic preceptor. The oldrince had changed in appearance only by the loss of a tooth, whicheft a noticeable gap on one side of his mouth; in character he washe same as ever, only showing still more irritability andkepticism as to what was happening in the world. Little Nicholaslone had changed. He had grown, become rosier, had curly dark hair,nd, when merry and laughing, quite unconsciously lifted the upper lipf his pretty little mouth just as the little princess used to do.e alone did not obey the law of immutability in the enchanted,leeping castle. But though externally all remained as of old, thenner relations of all these people had changed since Prince Andrewad seen them last. The household was divided into two alien andostile camps, who changed their habits for his sake and only metecause he was there. To the one camp belonged the old prince,admoiselle Bourienne, and the architect; to the other Princessary, Dessalles, little Nicholas, and all the old nurses and maids.
	During his stay at Bald Hills all the family dined together, buthey were ill at ease and Prince Andrew felt that he was a visitor forhose sake an exception was being made and that his presence made themll feel awkward. Involuntarily feeling this at dinner on the firstay, he was taciturn, and the old prince noticing this also becameorosely dumb and retired to his apartments directly after dinner.n the evening, when Prince Andrew went to him and, trying to rouseim, began to tell him of the young Count Kamensky's campaign, the oldrince began unexpectedly to talk about Princess Mary, blaming her forer superstitions and her dislike of Mademoiselle Bourienne, who, heaid, was the only person really attached to him.
	The old prince said that if he was ill it was only because ofrincess Mary: that she purposely worried and irritated him, andhat by indulgence and silly talk she was spoiling little Princeicholas. The old prince knew very well that he tormented his daughternd that her life was very hard, but he also knew that he could notelp tormenting her and that she deserved it. "Why does Prince Andrew,ho sees this, say nothing to me about his sister? Does he think me scoundrel, or an old fool who, without any reason, keeps his ownaughter at a distance and attaches this Frenchwoman to himself? Heoesn't understand, so I must explain it, and he must hear me out,"hought the old prince. And he began explaining why he could not putp with his daughter's unreasonable character.
	"If you ask me," said Prince Andrew, without looking up (he wasensuring his father for the first time in his life), "I did notish to speak about it, but as you ask me I will give you my frankpinion. If there is any misunderstanding and discord between yound Mary, I can't blame her for it at all. I know how she loves andespects you. Since you ask me," continued Prince Andrew, becomingrritable- as he was always liable to do of late- "I can only say thatf there are any misunderstandings they are caused by that worthlessoman, who is not fit to be my sister's companion."
	The old man at first stared fixedly at his son, and an unnaturalmile disclosed the fresh gap between his teeth to which Prince Andrewould not get accustomed.
	"What companion, my dear boy? Eh? You've already been talking itver! Eh?"
	"Father, I did not want to judge," said Prince Andrew, in a hard anditter tone, "but you challenged me, and I have said, and always shallay, that Mary is not to blame, but those to blame- the one tolame- is that Frenchwoman."
	"Ah, he has passed judgment... passed judgement!" said the old mann a low voice and, as it seemed to Prince Andrew, with somembarrassment, but then he suddenly jumped up and cried: "Be off, beff! Let not a trace of you remain here!..."
	Prince Andrew wished to leave at once, but Princess Mary persuadedim to stay another day. That day he did not see his father, who didot leave his room and admitted no one but Mademoiselle Bouriennend Tikhon, but asked several times whether his son had gone. Nextay, before leaving, Prince Andrew went to his son's rooms. The boy,urly-headed like his mother and glowing with health, sat on his knee,nd Prince Andrew began telling him the story of Bluebeard, but fellnto a reverie without finishing the story. He thought not of thisretty child, his son whom he held on his knee, but of himself. Heought in himself either remorse for having angered his father oregret at leaving home for the first time in his life on bad termsith him, and was horrified to find neither. What meant still moreo him was that he sought and did not find in himself the formerenderness for his son which he had hoped to reawaken by caressing theoy and taking him on his knee.
	"Well, go on!" said his son.
	Prince Andrew, without replying, put him down from his knee and wentut of the room.
	As soon as Prince Andrew had given up his daily occupations, andspecially on returning to the old conditions of life amid which head been happy, weariness of life overcame him with its formerntensity, and he hastened to escape from these memories and to findome work as soon as possible.
	"So you've decided to go, Andrew?" asked his sister.
	"Thank God that I can," replied Prince Andrew. "I am very sorryou can't."
	"Why do you say that?" replied Princess Mary. "Why do you sayhat, when you are going to this terrible war, and he is so old?ademoiselle Bourienne says he has been asking about you...."
	As soon as she began to speak of that, her lips trembled and herears began to fall. Prince Andrew turned away and began pacing theoom.
	"Ah, my God! my God! When one thinks who and what- what trash- canause people misery!" he said with a malignity that alarmed Princessary.
	She understood that when speaking of "trash" he referred not only toademoiselle Bourienne, the cause of her misery, but also to the manho had ruined his own happiness.
	"Andrew! One thing I beg, I entreat of you!" she said, touchingis elbow and looking at him with eyes that shone through her tears.I understand you" (she looked down). "Don't imagine that sorrow ishe work of men. Men are His tools." She looked a little aboverince Andrew's head with the confident, accustomed look with whichne looks at the place where a familiar portrait hangs. "Sorrow isent by Him, not by men. Men are His instruments, they are not tolame. If you think someone has wronged you, forget it and forgive! Weave no right to punish. And then you will know the happiness oforgiving."
	"If I were a woman I would do so, Mary. That is a woman's virtue.ut a man should not and cannot forgive and forget," he replied, andhough till that moment he had not been thinking of Kuragin, all hisnexpended anger suddenly swelled up in his heart.
	"If Mary is already persuading me forgive, it means that I oughtong ago to have punished him," he thought. And giving her nourther reply, he began thinking of the glad vindictive moment when heould meet Kuragin who he knew was now in the army.
	Princess Mary begged him to stay one day more, saying that shenew how unhappy her father would be if Andrew left without beingeconciled to him, but Prince Andrew replied that he would probablyoon be back again from the army and would certainly write to hisather, but that the longer he stayed now the more embittered theirifferences would become.
	"Good-by, Andrew! Remember that misfortunes come from God, and menre never to blame," were the last words he heard from his sister whene took leave of her.
	"Then it must be so!" thought Prince Andrew as he drove out of thevenue from the house at Bald Hills. "She, poor innocent creature,s left to be victimized by an old man who has outlived his wits.he old man feels he is guilty, but cannot change himself. My boy isrowing up and rejoices in life, in which like everybody else heill deceive or be deceived. And I am off to the army. Why? I myselfon't know. I want to meet that man whom I despise, so as to giveim a chance to kill and laugh at me!
	These conditions of life had been the same before, but then theyere all connected, while now they had all tumbled to pieces. Onlyenseless things, lacking coherence, presented themselves one afternother to Prince Andrew's mind.BK9|CH9
	CHAPTER IX
	Prince Andrew reached the general headquarters of the army at thend of June. The first army, with which was the Emperor, occupiedhe fortified camp at Drissa; the second army was retreating, tryingo effect a junction with the first one from which it was said to beut off by large French forces. Everyone was dissatisfied with theeneral course of affairs in the Russian army, but no onenticipated any danger of invasion of the Russian provinces, and none thought the war would extend farther than the western, the Polish,rovinces.
	Prince Andrew found Barclay de Tolly, to whom he had beenssigned, on the bank of the Drissa. As there was not a single town orarge village in the vicinity of the camp, the immense number ofenerals and courtiers accompanying the army were living in the bestouses of the villages on both sides of the river, over a radius ofix miles. Barclay de Tolly was quartered nearly three miles fromhe Emperor. He received Bolkonski stiffly and coldly and told himn his foreign accent that he would mention him to the Emperor for aecision as to his employment, but asked him meanwhile to remain onis staff. Anatole Kuragin, whom Prince Andrew had hoped to findith the army, was not there. He had gone to Petersburg, but Princendrew was glad to hear this. His mind was occupied by the interestsf the center that was conducting a gigantic war, and he was glad toe free for a while from the distraction caused by the thought ofuragin. During the first four days, while no duties were requiredf him, Prince Andrew rode round the whole fortified camp and, byhe aid of his own knowledge and by talks with experts, tried toorm a definite opinion about it. But the question whether the campas advantageous or disadvantageous remained for him undecided.lready from his military experience and what he had seen in theustrian campaign, he had come to the conclusion that in war theost deeply considered plans have no significance and that all dependsn the way unexpected movements of the enemy- that cannot be foreseen-re met, and on how and by whom the whole matter is handled. Tolear up this last point for himself, Prince Andrew, utilizing hisosition and acquaintances, tried to fathom the character of theontrol of the army and of the men and parties engaged in it, and heeduced for himself the following of the state of affairs.
	While the Emperor had still been at Vilna, the forces had beenivided into three armies. First, the army under Barclay de Tolly,econdly, the army under Bagration, and thirdly, the one commandedy Tormasov. The Emperor was with the first army, but not as commandern chief. In the orders issued it was stated, not that the Emperorould take command, but only that he would be with the army. Themperor, moreover, had with him not a commander in chief's staff buthe imperial headquarters staff. In attendance on him was the headf the imperial staff, Quartermaster General Prince Volkonski, as wells generals, imperial aides-de-camp, diplomatic officials, and a largeumber of foreigners, but not the army staff. Besides these, thereere in attendance on the Emperor without any definite appointments:rakcheev, the ex-Minister of War; Count Bennigsen, the senior generaln rank; the Grand Duke Tsarevich Constantine Pavlovich; Countumyantsev, the Chancellor; Stein, a former Prussian minister;rmfeldt, a Swedish general; Pfuel, the chief author of the plan ofampaign; Paulucci, an adjutant general and Sardinian emigre;olzogen- and many others. Though these men had no militaryppointment in the army, their position gave them influence, and often corps commander, or even the commander in chief, did not know inhat capacity he was questioned by Bennigsen, the Grand Duke,rakcheev, or Prince Volkonski, or was given this or that advice andid not know whether a certain order received in the form of advicemanated from the man who gave it or from the Emperor and whether itad to be executed or not. But this was only the external condition;he essential significance of the presence of the Emperor and of allhese people, from a courtier's point of view (and in an Emperor'sicinity all became courtiers), was clear to everyone. It was this:he Emperor did not assume the title of commander in chief, butisposed of all the armies; the men around him were his assistants.rakcheev was a faithful custodian to enforce order and acted as theovereign's bodyguard. Bennigsen was a landlord in the Vilnarovince who appeared to be doing the honors of the district, butas in reality a good general, useful as an adviser and ready atand to replace Barclay. The Grand Duke was there because it suitedim to be. The ex-Minister Stein was there because his advice wasseful and the Emperor Alexander held him in high esteem personally.rmfeldt virulently hated Napoleon and was a general full ofelf-confidence, a quality that always influenced Alexander.aulucci was there because he was bold and decided in speech. Thedjutants general were there because they always accompanied themperor, and lastly and chiefly Pfuel was there because he had drawnp the plan of campaign against Napoleon and, having induced Alexandero believe in the efficacy of that plan, was directing the wholeusiness of the war. With Pfuel was Wolzogen, who expressed Pfuel'shoughts in a more comprehensible way than Pfuel himself (who was aarsh, bookish theorist, self-confident to the point of despisingveryone else) was able to do.
	Besides these Russians and foreigners who propounded new andnexpected ideas every day- especially the foreigners, who did so with boldness characteristic of people employed in a country not theirwn- there were many secondary personages accompanying the armyecause their principals were there.
	Among the opinions and voices in this immense, restless,rilliant, and proud sphere, Prince Andrew noticed the followingharply defined subdivisions of and parties:
	The first party consisted of Pfuel and his adherents- militaryheorists who believed in a science of war with immutable laws- lawsf oblique movements, outflankings, and so forth. Pfuel and hisdherents demanded a retirement into the depths of the country inccordance with precise laws defined by a pseudo-theory of war, andhey saw only barbarism, ignorance, or evil intention in everyeviation from that theory. To this party belonged the foreign nobles,olzogen, Wintzingerode, and others, chiefly Germans.
	The second party was directly opposed to the first; one extreme,s always happens, was met by representatives of the other. Theembers of this party were those who had demanded an advance fromilna into Poland and freedom from all prearranged plans. Besideseing advocates of bold action, this section also representedationalism, which made them still more one-sided in the dispute. Theyere Russians: Bagration, Ermolov (who was beginning to come to theront), and others. At that time a famous joke of Ermolov's waseing circulated, that as a great favor he had petitioned themperor to make him a German. The men of that party, rememberinguvorov, said that what one had to do was not to reason, or stick pinsnto maps, but to fight, beat the enemy, keep him out of Russia, andot let the army get discouraged.
	To the third party- in which the Emperor had most confidence-elonged the courtiers who tried to arrange compromises between thether two. The members of this party, chiefly civilians and to whomrakcheev belonged, thought and said what men who have noonvictions but wish to seem to have some generally say. They saidhat undoubtedly war, particularly against such a genius asonaparte (they called him Bonaparte now), needs most deeply devisedlans and profound scientific knowledge and in that respect Pfuelas a genius, but at the same time it had to be acknowledged thathe theorists are often one sided, and therefore one should notrust them absolutely, but should also listen to what Pfuel'spponents and practical men of experience in warfare had to say, andhen choose a middle course. They insisted on the retention of theamp at Drissa, according to Pfuel's plan, but on changing theovements of the other armies. Though, by this course, neither one aimor the other could be attained, yet it seemed best to the adherentsf this third party.
	Of a fourth opinion the most conspicuous representative was thesarevich, who could not forget his disillusionment at Austerlitz,here he had ridden out at the head of the Guards, in his casque andavalry uniform as to a review, expecting to crush the Frenchallantly; but unexpectedly finding himself in the front line hadarrowly escaped amid the general confusion. The men of this party hadoth the quality and the defect of frankness in their opinions. Theyeared Napoleon, recognized his strength and their own weakness, andrankly said so. They said: "Nothing but sorrow, shame, and ruinill come of all this! We have abandoned Vilna and Vitebsk and shallbandon Drissa. The only reasonable thing left to do is to concludeeace as soon as possible, before we are turned out of Petersburg."
	This view was very general in the upper army circles and foundupport also in Petersburg and from the chancellor, Rumyantsev, who,or other reasons of state, was in favor of peace.
	The fifth party consisted of those who were adherents of Barclaye Tolly, not so much as a man but as minister of war and commander inhief. "Be he what he may" (they always began like that), "he is anonest, practical man and we have nobody better. Give him realower, for war cannot be conducted successfully without unity ofommand, and he will show what he can do, as he did in Finland. If ourrmy is well organized and strong and has withdrawn to Drissaithout suffering any defeats, we owe this entirely to Barclay. Ifarclay is now to be superseded by Bennigsen all will be lost, forennigsen showed his incapacity already in 1807."
	The sixth party, the Bennigsenites, said, on the contrary, that atny rate there was no one more active and experienced thanennigsen: "and twist about as you may, you will have to come toennigsen eventually. Let the others make mistakes now!" said they,rguing that our retirement to Drissa was a most shameful reversend an unbroken series of blunders. "The more mistakes that are madehe better. It will at any rate be understood all the sooner thathings cannot go on like this. What is wanted is not some Barclay orther, but a man like Bennigsen, who made his mark in 1807, and tohom Napoleon himself did justice- a man whose authority would beillingly recognized, and Bennigsen is the only such man."
	The seventh party consisted of the sort of people who are alwayso be found, especially around young sovereigns, and of whom thereere particularly many round Alexander- generals and imperialides-de-camp passionately devoted to the Emperor, not merely as aonarch but as a man, adoring him sincerely and disinterestedly, asostov had done in 1805, and who saw in him not only all the virtuesut all human capabilities as well. These men, though enchanted withhe sovereign for refusing the command of the army, yet blamed him foruch excessive modesty, and only desired and insisted that theirdored sovereign should abandon his diffidence and openly announcehat he would place himself at the head of the army, gather roundim a commander in chief's staff, and, consulting experiencedheoreticians and practical men where necessary, would himself leadhe troops, whose spirits would thereby be raised to the highestitch.
	The eighth and largest group, which in its enormous numbers was tohe others as ninety-nine to one, consisted of men who desired neithereace nor war, neither an advance nor a defensive camp at the Drissar anywhere else, neither Barclay nor the Emperor, neither Pfuel norennigsen, but only the one most essential thing- as much advantagend pleasure for themselves as possible. In the troubled waters ofonflicting and intersecting intrigues that eddied about the Emperor'seadquarters, it was possible to succeed in many ways unthinkable atther times. A man who simply wished to retain his lucrative postould today agree with Pfuel, tomorrow with his opponent, and theay after, merely to avoid responsibility or to please the Emperor,ould declare that he had no opinion at all on the matter. Another whoished to gain some advantage would attract the Emperor's attention byoudly advocating the very thing the Emperor had hinted at the dayefore, and would dispute and shout at the council, beating his breastnd challenging those who did not agree with him to duels, therebyroving that he was prepared to sacrifice himself for the common good. third, in the absence of opponents, between two councils wouldimply solicit a special gratuity for his faithful services, wellnowing that at that moment people would be too busy to refuse him. fourth while seemingly overwhelmed with work would often comeccidentally under the Emperor's eye. A fifth, to achieve hisong-cherished aim of dining with the Emperor, would stubbornly insistn the correctness or falsity of some newly emerging opinion and forhis object would produce arguments more or less forcible and correct.
	All the men of this party were fishing for rubles, decorations,nd promotions, and in this pursuit watched only the weathercock ofmperial favor, and directly they noticed it turning in any direction,his whole drone population of the army began blowing hard that way,o that it was all the harder for the Emperor to turn it elsewhere.mid the uncertainties of the position, with the menace of seriousanger giving a peculiarly threatening character to everything, amidhis vortex of intrigue, egotism, conflict of views and feelings,nd the diversity of race among these people- this eighth andargest party of those preoccupied with personal interests impartedreat confusion and obscurity to the common task. Whatever questionrose, a swarm of these drones, without having finished theiruzzing on a previous theme, flew over to the new one and by their humrowned and obscured the voices of those who were disputing honestly.
	From among all these parties, just at the time Prince Andrew reachedhe army, another, a ninth party, was being formed and was beginningo raise its voice. This was the party of the elders, reasonable menxperienced and capable in state affairs, who, without sharing anyf those conflicting opinions, were able to take a detached view ofhat was going on at the staff at headquarters and to consider meansf escape from this muddle, indecision, intricacy, and weakness.
	The men of this party said and thought that what was wrongesulted chiefly from the Emperor's presence in the army with hisilitary court and from the consequent presence there of anndefinite, conditional, and unsteady fluctuation of relations,hich is in place at court but harmful in an army; that a sovereignhould reign but not command the army, and that the only way out ofhe position would be for the Emperor and his court to leave the army;hat the mere presence of the Emperor paralyzed the action of fiftyhousand men required to secure his personal safety, and that theorst commander in chief if independent would be better than theery best one trammeled by the presence and authority of the monarch.
	Just at the time Prince Andrew was living unoccupied at Drissa,hishkov, the Secretary of State and one of the chiefepresentatives of this party, wrote a letter to the Emperor whichrakcheev and Balashev agreed to sign. In this letter, availingimself of permission given him by the Emperor to discuss theeneral course of affairs, he respectfully suggested- on the plea thatt was necessary for the sovereign to arouse a warlike spirit in theeople of the capital- that the Emperor should leave the army.
	That arousing of the people by their sovereign and his call tohem to defend their country- the very incitement which was thehief cause of Russia's triumph in so far as it was produced by thesar's personal presence in Moscow- was suggested to the Emperor,nd accepted by him, as a pretext for quitting the army.BK9|CH10
	CHAPTER X
	This letter had not yet been presented to the Emperor whenarclay, one day at dinner, informed Bolkonski that the sovereignished to see him personally, to question him about Turkey, and thatrince Andrew was to present himself at Bennigsen's quarters at sixhat evening.
	News was received at the Emperor's quarters that very day of a freshovement by Napoleon which might endanger the army- newsubsequently found to be false. And that morning Colonel Michaud hadidden round the Drissa fortifications with the Emperor and hadointed out to him that this fortified camp constructed by Pfuel,nd till then considered a chef-d'oeuvre of tactical science whichould ensure Napoleon's destruction, was an absurdity, threatening theestruction of the Russian army.
	Prince Andrew arrived at Bennigsen's quarters- a country gentleman'souse of moderate size, situated on the very banks of the river.either Bennigsen nor the Emperor was there, but Chernyshev, themperor's aide-de-camp, received Bolkonski and informed him that themperor, accompanied by General Bennigsen and Marquis Paulucci, hadone a second time that day to inspect the fortifications of therissa camp, of the suitability of which serious doubts were beginningo be felt.
	Chernyshev was sitting at a window in the first room with a Frenchovel in his hand. This room had probably been a music room; there wastill an organ in it on which some rugs were piled, and in oneorner stood the folding bedstead of Bennigsen's adjutant. Thisdjutant was also there and sat dozing on the rolled-up bedding,vidently exhausted by work or by feasting. Two doors led from theoom, one straight on into what had been the drawing room, andnother, on the right, to the study. Through the first door came theound of voices conversing in German and occasionally in French. Inhat drawing room were gathered, by the Emperor's wish, not a militaryouncil (the Emperor preferred indefiniteness), but certain personshose opinions he wished to know in view of the impendingifficulties. It was not a council of war, but, as it were, aouncil to elucidate certain questions for the Emperor personally.o this semicouncil had been invited the Swedish General Armfeldt,djutant General Wolzogen, Wintzingerode (whom Napoleon had referredo as a renegade French subject), Michaud, Toll, Count Stein who wasot a military man at all, and Pfuel himself, who, as Prince Andrewad heard, was the mainspring of the whole affair. Prince Andrew hadn opportunity of getting a good look at him, for Pfuel arrived soonfter himself and, in passing through to the drawing room, stopped ainute to speak to Chernyshev.
	At first sight, Pfuel, in his ill-made uniform of a Russian general,hich fitted him badly like a fancy costume, seemed familiar to Princendrew, though he saw him now for the first time. There was aboutim something of Weyrother, Mack, and Schmidt, and many other Germanheorist-generals whom Prince Andrew had seen in 1805, but he was moreypical than any of them. Prince Andrew had never yet seen a Germanheorist in whom all the characteristics of those others were unitedo such an extent.
	Pfuel was short and very thin but broad-boned, of coarse, robustuild, broad in the hips, and with prominent shoulder blades. His faceas much wrinkled and his eyes deep set. His hair had evidently beenastily brushed smooth in front of the temples, but stuck up behind inuaint little tufts. He entered the room, looking restlessly andngrily around, as if afraid of everything in that large apartment.wkwardly holding up his sword, he addressed Chernyshev and asked inerman where the Emperor was. One could see that he wished to passhrough the rooms as quickly as possible, finish with the bows andreetings, and sit down to business in front of a map, where heould feel at home. He nodded hurriedly in reply to Chernyshev, andmiled ironically on hearing that the sovereign was inspecting theortifications that he, Pfuel, had planned in accord with hisheory. He muttered something to himself abruptly and in a bass voice,s self-assured Germans do- it might have been "stupid fellow"... orthe whole affair will be ruined," or "something absurd will come oft."... Prince Andrew did not catch what he said and would have passedn, but Chernyshev introduced him to Pfuel, remarking that Princendrew was just back from Turkey where the war had terminated soortunately. Pfuel barely glanced- not so much at Prince Andrew asast him- and said, with a laugh: "That must have been a fine tacticalar"; and, laughing contemptuously, went on into the room from whichhe sound of voices was heard.
	Pfuel, always inclined to be irritably sarcastic, was particularlyisturbed that day, evidently by the fact that they had dared tonspect and criticize his camp in his absence. From this shortnterview with Pfuel, Prince Andrew, thanks to his Austerlitzxperiences, was able to form a clear conception of the man. Pfuel wasne of those hopelessly and immutably self-confident men,elf-confident to the point of martyrdom as only Germans are,ecause only Germans are self-confident on the basis of an abstractotion- science, that is, the supposed knowledge of absolute truth. Frenchman is self-assured because he regards himself personally,oth in mind and body, as irresistibly attractive to men and women. Annglishman is self-assured, as being a citizen of the best-organizedtate in the world, and therefore as an Englishman always knows whate should do and knows that all he does as an Englishman isndoubtedly correct. An Italian is self-assured because he isxcitable and easily forgets himself and other people. A Russian iself-assured just because he knows nothing does not want to knownything, since he does not believe that anything can be known. Theerman's self-assurance is worst of all, stronger and more repulsivehan any other, because he imagines that he knows the truth-cience- which he himself has invented but which is for him thebsolute truth.
	Pfuel was evidently of that sort. He had a science- the theory ofblique movements deduced by him from the history of Frederick thereat's wars, and all he came across in the history of more recentarfare seemed to him absurd and barbarous- monstrous collisions inhich so many blunders were committed by both sides that these warsould not be called wars, they did not accord with the theory, andherefore could not serve as material for science.
	In 1806 Pfuel had been one of those responsible, for the plan ofampaign that ended in Jena and Auerstadt, but he did not see theeast proof of the fallibility of his theory in the disasters ofhat war. On the contrary, the deviations made from his theory were,n his opinion, the sole cause of the whole disaster, and withharacteristically gleeful sarcasm he would remark, "There, I said thehole affair would go to the devil!" Pfuel was one of thoseheoreticians who so love their theory that they lose sight of theheory's object- its practical application. His love of theory madeim hate everything practical, and he would not listen to it. He wasven pleased by failures, for failures resulting from deviations inractice from the theory only proved to him the accuracy of hisheory.
	He said a few words to Prince Andrew and Chernyshev about theresent war, with the air of a man who knows beforehand that allill go wrong, and who is not displeased that it should be so. Thenbrushed tufts of hair sticking up behind and the hastily brushedair on his temples expressed this most eloquently.
	He passed into the next room, and the deep, querulous sounds ofis voice were at once heard from there.BK9|CH11
	CHAPTER XI
	Prince Andrew's eyes were still following Pfuel out of the room whenount Bennigsen entered hurriedly, and nodding to Bolkonski, but notausing, went into the study, giving instructions to his adjutant ase went. The Emperor was following him, and Bennigsen had hastenedn to make some preparations and to be ready to receive the sovereign.hernyshev and Prince Andrew went out into the porch, where themperor, who looked fatigued, was dismounting. Marquis Paulucci wasalking to him with particular warmth and the Emperor, with his headent to the left, was listening with a dissatisfied air. The Emperoroved forward evidently wishing to end the conversation, but thelushed and excited Italian, oblivious of decorum, followed him andontinued to speak.
	"And as for the man who advised forming this camp- the Drissa camp,"aid Paulucci, as the Emperor mounted the steps and noticing Princendrew scanned his unfamiliar face, "as to that person, sire..."ontinued Paulucci, desperately, apparently unable to restrainimself, "the man who advised the Drissa camp- I see no alternativeut the lunatic asylum or the gallows!"
	Without heeding the end of the Italian's remarks, and as thoughot hearing them, the Emperor, recognizing Bolkonski, addressed himraciously.
	"I am very glad to see you! Go in there where they are meeting,nd wait for me."
	The Emperor went into the study. He was followed by Prince Peterikhaylovich Volkonski and Baron Stein, and the door closed behindhem. Prince Andrew, taking advantage of the Emperor's permission,ccompanied Paulucci, whom he had known in Turkey, into the drawingoom where the council was assembled.
	Prince Peter Mikhaylovich Volkonski occupied the position, as itere, of chief of the Emperor's staff. He came out of the study intohe drawing room with some maps which he spread on a table, and putuestions on which he wished to hear the opinion of the gentlemenresent. What had happened was that news (which afterwards proved toe false) had been received during the night of a movement by therench to outflank the Drissa camp.
	The first to speak was General Armfeldt who, to meet theifficulty that presented itself, unexpectedly proposed a perfectlyew position away from the Petersburg and Moscow roads. The reason forhis was inexplicable (unless he wished to show that he, too, couldave an opinion), but he urged that at this point the army shouldnite and there await the enemy. It was plain that Armfeldt hadhought out that plan long ago and now expounded it not so much tonswer the questions put- which, in fact, his plan did not answer-s to avail himself of the opportunity to air it. It was one of theillions of proposals, one as good as another, that could be made asong as it was quite unknown what character the war would take. Someisputed his arguments, others defended them. Young Count Tollbjected to the Swedish general's views more warmly than anyonelse, and in the course of the dispute drew from his side pocket aell-filled notebook, which he asked permission to read to them. Inhese voluminous notes Toll suggested another scheme, totallyifferent from Armfeldt's or Pfuel's plan of campaign. In answer tooll, Paulucci suggested an advance and an attack, which, he urged,ould alone extricate us from the present uncertainty and from therap (as he called the Drissa camp) in which we were situated.
	During all these discussions Pfuel and his interpreter, Wolzogenhis "bridge" in court relations), were silent. Pfuel only snortedontemptuously and turned away, to show that he would never demeanimself by replying to such nonsense as he was now hearing. So whenrince Volkonski, who was in the chair, called on him to give hispinion, he merely said:
	"Why ask me? General Armfeldt has proposed a splendid positionith an exposed rear, or why not this Italian gentleman's attack- veryine, or a retreat, also good! Why ask me?" said he. "Why, youourselves know everything better than I do."
	But when Volkonski said, with a frown, that it was in themperor's name that he asked his opinion, Pfuel rose and, suddenlyrowing animated, began to speak:
	"Everything has been spoiled, everything muddled, everybodyhought they knew better than I did, and now you come to me! Howend matters? There is nothing to mend! The principles laid down by meust be strictly adhered to," said he, drumming on the table withis bony fingers. "What is the difficulty? Nonsense, childishness!"
	He went up to the map and speaking rapidly began proving that noventuality could alter the efficiency of the Drissa camp, thatverything had been foreseen, and that if the enemy were reallyoing to outflank it, the enemy would inevitably be destroyed.
	Paulucci, who did not know German, began questioning him inrench. Wolzogen came to the assistance of his chief, who spoke Frenchadly, and began translating for him, hardly able to keep pace withfuel, who was rapidly demonstrating that not only all that hadappened, but all that could happen, had been foreseen in hischeme, and that if there were now any difficulties the whole faultay in the fact that his plan had not been precisely executed. He keptaughing sarcastically, he demonstrated, and at last contemptuouslyeased to demonstrate, like a mathematician who ceases to prove inarious ways the accuracy of a problem that has already been proved.olzogen took his place and continued to explain his views inrench, every now and then turning to Pfuel and saying, "Is it not so,our excellency?" But Pfuel, like a man heated in a fight whotrikes those on his own side, shouted angrily at his own supporter,olzogen:
	"Well, of course, what more is there to explain?"
	Paulucci and Michaud both attacked Wolzogen simultaneously inrench. Armfeldt addressed Pfuel in German. Toll explained toolkonski in Russian. Prince Andrew listened and observed in silence.
	Of all these men Prince Andrew sympathized most with Pfuel, angry,etermined, and absurdly self-confident as he was. Of all thoseresent, evidently he alone was not seeking anything for himself,ursed no hatred against anyone, and only desired that the plan,ormed on a theory arrived at by years of toil, should be carried out.e was ridiculous, and unpleasantly sarcastic, but yet he inspirednvoluntary respect by his boundless devotion to an idea. Besideshis, the remarks of all except Pfuel had one common trait that hadot been noticeable at the council of war in 1805: there was now aanic fear of Napoleon's genius, which, though concealed, wasoticeable in every rejoinder. Everything was assumed to be possibleor Napoleon, they expected him from every side, and invoked hiserrible name to shatter each other's proposals. Pfuel alone seemed toonsider Napoleon a barbarian like everyone else who opposed hisheory. But besides this feeling of respect, Pfuel evoked pity inrince Andrew. From the tone in which the courtiers addressed himnd the way Paulucci had allowed himself to speak of him to themperor, but above all from a certain desperation in Pfuel's ownxpressions, it was clear that the others knew, and Pfuel himselfelt, that his fall was at hand. And despite his self-confidence andrumpy German sarcasm he was pitiable, with his hair smoothlyrushed on the temples and sticking up in tufts behind. Though heoncealed the fact under a show of irritation and contempt, he wasvidently in despair that the sole remaining chance of verifying hisheory by a huge experiment and proving its soundness to the wholeorld was slipping away from him.
	The discussions continued a long time, and the longer they lastedhe more heated became the disputes, culminating in shouts andersonalities, and the less was it possible to arrive at any generalonclusion from all that had been said. Prince Andrew, listening tohis polyglot talk and to these surmises, plans, refutations, andhouts, felt nothing but amazement at what they were saying. A thoughthat had long since and often occurred to him during his militaryctivities- the idea that there is not and cannot be any science ofar, and that therefore there can be no such thing as a militaryenius- now appeared to him an obvious truth. "What theory and sciences possible about a matter the conditions and circumstances of whichre unknown and cannot be defined, especially when the strength of thecting forces cannot be ascertained? No one was or is able tooresee in what condition our or the enemy's armies will be in a day'sime, and no one can gauge the force of this or that detachment.ometimes- when there is not a coward at the front to shout, 'We areut off!' and start running, but a brave and jolly lad who shouts,Hurrah!'- a detachment of five thousand is worth thirty thousand,s at Schon Grabern, while at times fifty thousand run from eighthousand, as at Austerlitz. What science can there be in a matter inhich, as in all practical matters, nothing can be defined andverything depends on innumerable conditions, the significance ofhich is determined at a particular moment which arrives no onenows when? Armfeldt says our army is cut in half, and Paulucci sayse have got the French army between two fires; Michaud says that theorthlessness of the Drissa camp lies in having the river behind it,nd Pfuel says that is what constitutes its strength; Toll proposesne plan, Armfeldt another, and they are all good and all bad, and thedvantages of any suggestions can be seen only at the moment of trial.nd why do they all speak of a 'military genius'? Is a man a geniusho can order bread to be brought up at the right time and say whos to go to the right and who to the left? It is only because militaryen are invested with pomp and power and crowds of sychophants flatterower, attributing to it qualities of genius it does not possess.he best generals I have known were, on the contrary, stupid orbsent-minded men. Bagration was the best, Napoleon himself admittedhat. And of Bonaparte himself! I remember his limited, self-satisfiedace on the field of Austerlitz. Not only does a good army commanderot need any special qualities, on the contrary he needs the absencef the highest and best human attributes- love, poetry, tenderness,nd philosophic inquiring doubt. He should be limited, firmlyonvinced that what he is doing is very important (otherwise he willot have sufficient patience), and only then will he be a braveeader. God forbid that he should be humane, should love, or pity,r think of what is just and unjust. It is understandable that aheory of their 'genius' was invented for them long ago because theyave power! The success of a military action depends not on them,ut on the man in the ranks who shouts, 'We are lost!' or whohouts, 'Hurrah!' And only in the ranks can one serve with assurancef being useful."
	So thought Prince Andrew as he listened to the talking, and heoused himself only when Paulucci called him and everyone was leaving.
	At the review next day the Emperor asked Prince Andrew where heould like to serve, and Prince Andrew lost his standing in courtircles forever by not asking to remain attached to the sovereign'serson, but for permission to serve in the army.BK9|CH12
	CHAPTER XII
	Before the beginning of the campaign, Rostov had received a letterrom his parents in which they told him briefly of Natasha's illnessnd the breaking off of her engagement to Prince Andrew (which theyxplained by Natasha's having rejected him) and again asked Nicholaso retire from the army and return home. On receiving this letter,icholas did not even make any attempt to get leave of absence or toetire from the army, but wrote to his parents that he was sorryatasha was ill and her engagement broken off, and that he would doll he could to meet their wishes. To Sonya he wrote separately.
	"Adored friend of my soul!" he wrote. "Nothing but honor couldeep me from returning to the country. But now, at the commencement ofhe campaign, I should feel dishonored, not only in my comrades'yes but in my own, if I preferred my own happiness to my love anduty to the Fatherland. But this shall be our last separation. Believee, directly the war is over, if I am still alive and still loved byou, I will throw up everything and fly to you, to press you forevero my ardent breast."
	It was, in fact, only the commencement of the campaign thatrevented Rostov from returning home as he had promised and marryingonya. The autumn in Otradnoe with the hunting, and the winter withhe Christmas holidays and Sonya's love, had opened out to him a vistaf tranquil rural joys and peace such as he had never known before,nd which now allured him. "A splendid wife, children, a good packf hounds, a dozen leashes of smart borzois, agriculture, neighbors,ervice by election..." thought he. But now the campaign waseginning, and he had to remain with his regiment. And since it had toe so, Nicholas Rostov, as was natural to him, felt contented with theife he led in the regiment and was able to find pleasure in thatife.
	On his return from his furlough Nicholas, having been joyfullyelcomed by his comrades, was sent to obtain remounts and brought backrom the Ukraine excellent horses which pleased him and earned himommendation from his commanders. During his absence he had beenromoted captain, and when the regiment was put on war footing with anncrease in numbers, he was again allotted his old squadron.
	The campaign began, the regiment was moved into Poland on doubleay, new officers arrived, new men and horses, and above all everybodyas infected with the merrily excited mood that goes with theommencement of a war, and Rostov, conscious of his advantageousosition in the regiment, devoted himself entirely to the pleasuresnd interests of military service, though he knew that sooner or latere would have to relinquish them.
	The troops retired from Vilna for various complicated reasons oftate, political and strategic. Each step of the retreat wasccompanied by a complicated interplay of interests, arguments, andassions at headquarters. For the Pavlograd hussars, however, thehole of this retreat during the finest period of summer and withufficient supplies was a very simple and agreeable business.
	It was only at headquarters that there was depression, uneasiness,nd intriguing; in the body of the army they did not ask themselveshere they were going or why. If they regretted having to retreat,t was only because they had to leave billets they had grownccustomed to, or some pretty young Polish lady. If the thought thathings looked bad chanced to enter anyone's head, he tried to be asheerful as befits a good soldier and not to think of the generalrend of affairs, but only of the task nearest to hand. First theyamped gaily before Vilna, making acquaintance with the Polishandowners, preparing for reviews and being reviewed by the Emperornd other high commanders. Then came an order to retreat to Sventsyanind destroy any provisions they could not carry away with them.ventsyani was remembered by the hussars only as the drunken camp, aame the whole army gave to their encampment there, and because manyomplaints were made against the troops, who, taking advantage ofhe order to collect provisions, took also horses, carriages, andarpets from the Polish proprietors. Rostov remembered Sventsyani,ecause on the first day of their arrival at that small town hehanged his sergeant major and was unable to manage all the drunkenen of his squadron who, unknown to him, had appropriated five barrelsf old beer. From Sventsyani they retired farther and farther torissa, and thence again beyond Drissa, drawing near to the frontierf Russia proper.
	On the thirteenth of July the Pavlograds took part in a seriousction for the first time.
	On the twelfth of July, on the eve of that action, there was a heavytorm of rain and hail. In general, the summer of 18l2 wasemarkable for its storms.
	The two Pavlograd squadrons were bivouacking on a field of rye,hich was already in ear but had been completely trodden down byattle and horses. The rain was descending in torrents, and Rostov,ith a young officer named Ilyin, his protege, was sitting in aastily constructed shelter. An officer of their regiment, with longustaches extending onto his cheeks, who after riding to the staff hadeen overtaken by the rain, entered Rostov's shelter.
	"I have come from the staff, Count. Have you heard of Raevski'sxploit?"
	And the officer gave them details of the Saltanov battle, which head heard at the staff.
	Rostov, smoking his pipe and turning his head about as the waterrickled down his neck, listened inattentively, with an occasionallance at Ilyin, who was pressing close to him. This officer, a lad ofixteen who had recently joined the regiment, was now in the sameelation to Nicholas that Nicholas had been to Denisov seven yearsefore. Ilyin tried to imitate Rostov in everything and adored hims a girl might have done.
	Zdrzhinski, the officer with the long mustache, spokerandiloquently of the Saltanov dam being "a Russian Thermopylae," andf how a deed worthy of antiquity had been performed by Generalaevski. He recounted how Raevski had led his two sons onto the damnder terrific fire and had charged with them beside him. Rostov heardhe story and not only said nothing to encourage Zdrzhinski'snthusiasm but, on the contrary, looked like a man ashamed of whate was hearing, though with no intention of contradicting it. Sincehe campaigns of Austerlitz and of 1807 Rostov knew by experience thaten always lie when describing military exploits, as he himself hadone when recounting them; besides that, he had experience enough tonow that nothing happens in war at all as we can imagine or relatet. And so he did not like Zdrzhinski's tale, nor did he likedrzhinski himself who, with his mustaches extending over hisheeks, bent low over the face of his hearer, as was his habit, androwded Rostov in the narrow shanty. Rostov looked at him inilence. "In the first place, there must have been such a confusionnd crowding on the dam that was being attacked that if Raevski didead his sons there, it could have had no effect except perhaps onome dozen men nearest to him," thought he, "the rest could not haveeen how or with whom Raevski came onto the dam. And even those whoid see it would not have been much stimulated by it, for what hadhey to do with Raevski's tender paternal feelings when their ownkins were in danger? And besides, the fate of the Fatherland didot depend on whether they took the Saltanov dam or not, as we areold was the case at Thermopylae. So why should he have made such aacrifice? And why expose his own children in the battle? I wouldot have taken my brother Petya there, or even Ilyin, who's a strangero me but a nice lad, but would have tried to put them somewhere underover," Nicholas continued to think, as he listened to Zdrzhinski. Bute did not express his thoughts, for in such matters, too, he hadained experience. He knew that this tale redounded to the glory ofur arms and so one had to pretend not to doubt it. And he actedccordingly.
	"I can't stand this any more," said Ilyin, noticing that Rostovid not relish Zdrzhinski's conversation. "My stockings and shirt...nd the water is running on my seat! I'll go and look for shelter. Theain seems less heavy."
	Ilyin went out and Zdrzhinski rode away.
	Five minutes later Ilyin, splashing through the mud, came runningack to the shanty.
	"Hurrah! Rostov, come quick! I've found it! About two hundredards away there's a tavern where ours have already gathered. We cant least get dry there, and Mary Hendrikhovna's there."
	Mary Hendrikhovna was the wife of the regimental doctor, a prettyoung German woman he had married in Poland. The doctor, whetherrom lack of means or because he did not like to part from his youngife in the early days of their marriage, took her about with himherever the hussar regiment went and his jealousy had become atanding joke among the hussar officers.
	Rostov threw his cloak over his shoulders, shouted to Lavrushka toollow with the things, and- now slipping in the mud, now splashingight through it- set off with Ilyin in the lessening rain and thearkness that was occasionally rent by distant lightning.
	"Rostov, where are you?"
	"Here. What lightning!" they called to one another.BK9|CH13
	CHAPTER XIII
	In the tavern, before which stood the doctor's covered cart, thereere already some five officers. Mary Hendrikhovna, a plump littlelonde German, in a dressing jacket and nightcap, was sitting on aroad bench in the front corner. Her husband, the doctor, lay asleepehind her. Rostov and Ilyin, on entering the room, were welcomed witherry shouts and laughter.
	"Dear me, how jolly we are!" said Rostov laughing.
	"And why do you stand there gaping?"
	"What swells they are! Why, the water streams from them! Don'take our drawing room so wet."
	"Don't mess Mary Hendrikhovna's dress!" cried other voices.
	Rostov and Ilyin hastened to find a corner where they could changento dry clothes without offending Mary Hendrikhovna's modesty. Theyere going into a tiny recess behind a partition to change, butound it completely filled by three officers who sat playing cardsy the light of a solitary candle on an empty box, and thesefficers would on no account yield their position. Mary Hendrikhovnabliged them with the loan of a petticoat to be used as a curtain, andehind that screen Rostov and Ilyin, helped by Lavrushka who hadrought their kits, changed their wet things for dry ones.
	A fire was made up in the dilapidated brick stove. A board wasound, fixed on two saddles and covered with a horsecloth, a smallamovar was produced and a cellaret and half a bottle of rum, andaving asked Mary Hendrikhovna to preside, they all crowded round her.ne offered her a clean handkerchief to wipe her charming hands,nother spread a jacket under her little feet to keep them from theamp, another hung his coat over the window to keep out the draft, andet another waved the flies off her husband's face, lest he shouldake up.
	"Leave him alone," said Mary Hendrikhovna, smiling timidly andappily. "He is sleeping well as it is, after a sleepless night."
	"Oh, no, Mary Hendrikhovna," replied the officer, "one must lookfter the doctor. Perhaps he'll take pity on me someday, when it comeso cutting off a leg or an arm for me."
	There were only three tumblers, the water was so muddy that oneould not make out whether the tea was strong or weak, and the samovareld only six tumblers of water, but this made it all the pleasantero take turns in order of seniority to receive one's tumbler from Maryendrikhovna's plump little hands with their short and not overcleanails. All the officers appeared to be, and really were, in loveith her that evening. Even those playing cards behind the partitionoon left their game and came over to the samovar, yielding to theeneral mood of courting Mary Hendrikhovna. She, seeing herselfurrounded by such brilliant and polite young men, beamed withatisfaction, try as she might to hide it, and perturbed as shevidently was each time her husband moved in his sleep behind her.
	There was only one spoon, sugar was more plentiful than anythinglse, but it took too long to dissolve, so it was decided that Maryendrikhovna should stir the sugar for everyone in turn. Rostoveceived his tumbler, and adding some rum to it asked Maryendrikhovna to stir it.
	"But you take it without sugar?" she said, smiling all the time,s if everything she said and everything the others said was verymusing and had a double meaning.
	"It is not the sugar I want, but only that your little hand shouldtir my tea."
	Mary Hendrikhovna assented and began looking for the spoon whichomeone meanwhile had pounced on.
	"Use your finger, Mary Hendrikhovna, it will be still nicer," saidostov.
	"Too hot!" she replied, blushing with pleasure.
	Ilyin put a few drops of rum into the bucket of water and brought ito Mary Hendrikhovna, asking her to stir it with her finger.
	"This is my cup," said he. "Only dip your finger in it and I'llrink it all up."
	When they had emptied the samovar, Rostov took a pack of cards androposed that they should play "Kings" with Mary Hendrikhovna. Theyrew lots to settle who should make up her set. At Rostov's suggestiont was agreed that whoever became "King" should have the right to kissary Hendrikhovna's hand, and that the "Booby" should go to refill andeheat the samovar for the doctor when the latter awoke.
	"Well, but supposing Mary Hendrikhovna is 'King'?" asked Ilyin.
	"As it is, she is Queen, and her word is law!"
	They had hardly begun to play before the doctor's disheveled headuddenly appeared from behind Mary Hendrikhovna. He had been awake forome time, listening to what was being said, and evidently foundothing entertaining or amusing in what was going on. His face was sadnd depressed. Without greeting the officers, he scratched himself andsked to be allowed to pass as they were blocking the way. As soons he had left the room all the officers burst into loud laughternd Mary Hendrikhovna blushed till her eyes filled with tears andhereby became still more attractive to them. Returning from the yard,he doctor told his wife (who had ceased to smile so happily, andooked at him in alarm, awaiting her sentence) that the rain hadeased and they must go to sleep in their covered cart, orverything in it would be stolen.
	"But I'll send an orderly.... Two of them!" said Rostov. "What andea, doctor!"
	"I'll stand guard on it myself!" said Ilyin.
	"No, gentlemen, you have had your sleep, but I have not slept forwo nights," replied the doctor, and he sat down morosely beside hisife, waiting for the game to end.
	Seeing his gloomy face as he frowned at his wife, the officersrew still merrier, and some of them could not refrain fromaughter, for which they hurriedly sought plausible pretexts. Whene had gone, taking his wife with him, and had settled down with hern their covered cart, the officers lay down in the tavern, coveringhemselves with their wet cloaks, but they did not sleep for a longime; now they exchanged remarks, recalling the doctor's uneasinessnd his wife's delight, now they ran out into the porch and reportedhat was taking place in the covered trap. Several times Rostov,overing his head, tried to go to sleep, but some remark wouldrouse him and conversation would be resumed, to the accompanimentf unreasoning, merry, childlike laughter.BK9|CH14
	CHAPTER XIV
	It was nearly three o'clock but no one was yet asleep, when theuartermaster appeared with an order to move on to the little townf Ostrovna. Still laughing and talking, the officers beganurriedly getting ready and again boiled again boiled some muddy watern the samovar. But Rostov went off to his squadron without waitingor tea. Day was breaking, the rain had ceased, and the clouds wereispersing. It felt damp and cold, especially in clothes that weretill moist. As they left the tavern in the twilight of the dawn,ostov and Ilyin both glanced under the wet and glistening leatherood of the doctor's cart, from under the apron of which his feet wereticking out, and in the middle of which his wife's nightcap wasisible and her sleepy breathing audible.
	"She really is a dear little thing," said Rostov to Ilyin, who wasollowing him.
	"A charming woman!" said Ilyin, with all the gravity of a boy ofixteen.
	Half an hour later the squadron was lined up on the road. Theommand was heard to "mount" and the soldiers crossed themselves andounted. Rostov riding in front gave the order "Forward!" and theussars, with clanking sabers and subdued talk, their horses' hoofsplashing in the mud, defiled in fours and moved along the broadoad planted with birch trees on each side, following the infantry and battery that had gone on in front.
	Tattered, blue-purple clouds, reddening in the east, were scuddingefore the wind. It was growing lighter and lighter. That curlyrass which always grows by country roadsides became clearlyisible, still wet with the night's rain; the drooping branches of theirches, also wet, swayed in the wind and flung down bright drops ofater to one side. The soldiers' faces were more and more clearlyisible. Rostov, always closely followed by Ilyin, rode along the sidef the road between two rows of birch trees.
	When campaigning, Rostov allowed himself the indulgence of ridingot a regimental but a Cossack horse. A judge of horses and aportsman, he had lately procured himself a large, fine, mettlesome,onets horse, dun-colored, with light mane and tail, and when heode it no one could outgallop him. To ride this horse was aleasure to him, and he thought of the horse, of the morning, of theoctor's wife, but not once of the impending danger.
	Formerly, when going into action, Rostov had felt afraid; now he hadot the least feeling of fear. He was fearless, not because he hadrown used to being under fire (one cannot grow used to danger), butecause he had learned how to manage his thoughts when in danger. Head grown accustomed when going into action to think about anythingut what would seem most likely to interest him- the impending danger.uring the first period of his service, hard as he tried and much ase reproached himself with cowardice, he had not been able to do this,ut with time it had come of itself. Now he rode beside Ilyin underhe birch trees, occasionally plucking leaves from a branch that metis hand, sometimes touching his horse's side with his foot, or,ithout turning round, handing a pipe he had finished to an hussariding behind him, with as calm and careless an air as though heere merely out for a ride. He glanced with pity at the excited facef Ilyin, who talked much and in great agitation. He knew fromxperience the tormenting expectation of terror and death the cornetas suffering and knew that only time could help him.
	As soon as the sun appeared in a clear strip of sky beneath thelouds, the wind fell, as if it dared not spoil the beauty of theummer morning after the storm; drops still continued to fall, butertically now, and all was still. The whole sun appeared on theorizon and disappeared behind a long narrow cloud that hung above it. few minutes later it reappeared brighter still from behind the topf the cloud, tearing its edge. Everything grew bright andlittered. And with that light, and as if in reply to it, came theound of guns ahead of them.
	Before Rostov had had time to consider and determine the distance ofhat firing, Count Ostermann-Tolstoy's adjutant came galloping fromitebsk with orders to advance at a trot along the road.
	The squadron overtook and passed the infantry and the battery- whichad also quickened their pace- rode down a hill, and passing throughn empty and deserted village again ascended. The horses began toather and the men to flush.
	"Halt! Dress your ranks!" the order of the regimental commanderas heard ahead. "Forward by the left. Walk, march!" came the orderrom in front.
	And the hussars, passing along the line of troops on the leftlank of our position, halted behind our Uhlans who were in theront line. To the right stood our infantry in a dense column: theyere the reserve. Higher up the hill, on the very horizon, our gunsere visible through the wonderfully clear air, brightly illuminatedy slanting morning sunbeams. In front, beyond a hollow dale, could beeen the enemy's columns and guns. Our advanced line, already inction, could be heard briskly exchanging shots with the enemy inhe dale.
	At these sounds, long unheard, Rostov's spirits rose, as at thetrains of the merriest music. Trap-ta-ta-tap! cracked the shots,ow together, now several quickly one after another. Again all wasilent and then again it sounded as if someone were walking onetonators and exploding them.
	The hussars remained in the same place for about an hour. Aannonade began. Count Ostermann with his suite rode up behind thequadron, halted, spoke to the commander of the regiment, and rodep the hill to the guns.
	After Ostermann had gone, a command rang out to the Uhlans.
	"Form column! Prepare to charge!"
	The infantry in front of them parted into platoons to allow theavalry to pass. The Uhlans started, the streamers on their spearsluttering, and trotted downhill toward the French cavalry which waseen below to the left.
	As soon as the Uhlans descended the hill, the hussars were orderedp the hill to support the battery. As they took the places vacated byhe Uhlans, bullets came from the front, whining and whistling, butell spent without taking effect.
	The sounds, which he had not heard for so long, had an even moreleasurable and exhilarating effect on Rostov than the previous soundsf firing. Drawing himself up, he viewed the field of battle openingut before him from the hill, and with his whole soul followed theovement of the Uhlans. They swooped down close to the Frenchragoons, something confused happened there amid the smoke, and fiveinutes later our Uhlans were galloping back, not to the place theyad occupied but more to the left, and among the orange-colored Uhlansn chestnut horses and behind them, in a large group, blue Frenchragoons on gray horses could be seen.BK9|CH15
	CHAPTER XV
	Rostov, with his keen sportsman's eye, was one of the first to catchight of these blue French dragoons pursuing our Uhlans. Nearer andearer in disorderly crowds came the Uhlans and the French dragoonsursuing them. He could already see how these men, who looked so smallt the foot of the hill, jostled and overtook one another, wavingheir arms and their sabers in the air.
	Rostov gazed at what was happening before him as at a hunt. Heelt instinctively that if the hussars struck at the French dragoonsow, the latter could not withstand them, but if a charge was to beade it must be done now, at that very moment, or it would be tooate. He looked around. A captain, standing beside him, was gazingike himself with eyes fixed on the cavalry below them.
	"Andrew Sevastyanych!" said Rostov. "You know, we could crushhem...."
	"A fine thing too!" replied the captain, "and really..."
	Rostov, without waiting to hear him out, touched his horse, gallopedo the front of his squadron, and before he had time to finishiving the word of command, the whole squadron, sharing his feeling,as following him. Rostov himself did not know how or why he did it.e acted as he did when hunting, without reflecting or considering. Heaw the dragoons near and that they were galloping in disorder; henew they could not withstand an attack- knew there was only thatoment and that if he let it slip it would not return. The bulletsere whining and whistling so stimulatingly around him and his horseas so eager to go that he could not restrain himself. He touchedis horse, gave the word of command, and immediately, hearing behindim the tramp of the horses of his deployed squadron, rode at fullrot downhill toward the dragoons. Hardly had they reached theottom of the hill before their pace instinctively changed to aallop, which grew faster and faster as they drew nearer to our Uhlansnd the French dragoons who galloped after them. The dragoons were nowlose at hand. On seeing the hussars, the foremost began to turn,hile those behind began to halt. With the same feeling with whiche had galloped across the path of a wolf, Rostov gave rein to hisonets horse and galloped to intersect the path of the dragoons'isordered lines. One Uhlan stopped, another who was on foot flungimself to the ground to avoid being knocked over, and a riderlessorse fell in among the hussars. Nearly all the French dragoons werealloping back. Rostov, picking out one on a gray horse, dashedfter him. On the way he came upon a bush, his gallant horse clearedt, and almost before he had righted himself in his saddle he saw thate would immediately overtake the enemy he had selected. Thatrenchman, by his uniform an officer, was going at a gallop, crouchingn his gray horse and urging it on with his saber. In another momentostov's horse dashed its breast against the hindquarters of thefficer's horse, almost knocking it over, and at the same instantostov, without knowing why, raised his saber and struck the Frenchmanith it.
	The instant he had done this, all Rostov's animation vanished. Thefficer fell, not so much from the blow- which had but slightly cutis arm above the elbow- as from the shock to his horse and fromright. Rostov reined in his horse, and his eyes sought his foe to seehom he had vanquished. The French dragoon officer was hopping withne foot on the ground, the other being caught in the stirrup. Hisyes, screwed up with fear as if he every moment expected anotherlow, gazed up at Rostov with shrinking terror. His pale andud-stained face- fair and young, with a dimple in the chin andight-blue eyes- was not an enemy's face at all suited to aattlefield, but a most ordinary, homelike face. Before Rostov hadecided what to do with him, the officer cried, "I surrender!" Heurriedly but vainly tried to get his foot out of the stirrup andid not remove his frightened blue eyes from Rostov's face. Someussars who galloped up disengaged his foot and helped him into theaddle. On all sides, the hussars were busy with the dragoons; one wasounded, but though his face was bleeding, he would not give up hisorse; another was perched up behind an hussar with his arms roundim; a third was being helped by an hussar to mount his horse. Inront, the French infantry were firing as they ran. The hussarsalloped hastily back with their prisoners. Rostov galloped backith the rest, aware of an unpleasant feeling of depression in hiseart. Something vague and confused, which he could not at all accountor, had come over him with the capture of that officer and the blowe had dealt him.
	Count Ostermann-Tolstoy met the returning hussars, sent forostov, thanked him, and said he would report his gallant deed tohe Emperor and would recommend him for a St. George's Cross. Whenent for by Count Ostermann, Rostov, remembering that he had chargedithout orders, felt sure his commander was sending for him tounish him for breach of discipline. Ostermann's flattering wordsnd promise of a reward should therefore have struck him all theore pleasantly, but he still felt that same vaguely disagreeableeeling of moral nausea. "But what on earth is worrying me?" hesked himself as he rode back from the general. "Ilyin? No, he's safe.ave I disgraced myself in any way? No, that's not it." Somethinglse, resembling remorse, tormented him. "Yes, oh yes, that Frenchfficer with the dimple. And I remember how my arm paused when Iaised it."
	Rostov saw the prisoners being led away and galloped after them toave a look at his Frenchman with the dimple on his chin. He wasitting in his foreign uniform on an hussar packhorse and lookednxiously about him; The sword cut on his arm could scarcely be called wound. He glanced at Rostov with a feigned smile and waved hisand in greeting. Rostov still had the same indefinite feeling, asf shame.
	All that day and the next his friends and comrades noticed thatostov, without being dull or angry, was silent, thoughtful, andreoccupied. He drank reluctantly, tried to remain alone, and kepturning something over in his mind.
	Rostov was always thinking about that brilliant exploit of his,hich to his amazement had gained him the St. George's Cross andven given him a reputation for bravery, and there was something heould not at all understand. "So others are even more afraid than Im!" he thought. "So that's all there is in what is called heroism!nd heroism! And did I do it for my country's sake? And how was heo blame, with his dimple and blue eyes? And how frightened he was! Hehought that I should kill him. Why should I kill him? My handrembled. And they have given me a St. George's Cross.... I can't maket out at all."
	But while Nicholas was considering these questions and still couldeach no clear solution of what puzzled him so, the wheel of fortunen the service, as often happens, turned in his favor. After theffair at Ostrovna he was brought into notice, received command ofn hussar battalion, and when a brave officer was needed he washosen.BK9|CH16
	CHAPTER XVI
	On receiving news of Natasha's illness, the countess, though notuite well yet and still weak, went to Moscow with Petya and theest of the household, and the whole family moved from Maryamitrievna's house to their own and settled down in town.
	Natasha's illness was so serious that, fortunately for her and forer parents, the consideration of all that had caused the illness, heronduct and the breaking off of her engagement, receded into theackground. She was so ill that it was impossible for them to considern how far she was to blame for what had happened. She could not eatr sleep, grew visibly thinner, coughed, and, as the doctors made themeel, was in danger. They could not think of anything but how toelp her. Doctors came to see her singly and in consultation, talkeduch in French, German, and Latin, blamed one another, andrescribed a great variety of medicines for all the diseases knowno them, but the simple idea never occurred to any of them that theyould not know the disease Natasha was suffering from, as no diseaseuffered by a live man can be known, for every living person has hiswn peculiarities and always has his own peculiar, personal, novel,omplicated disease, unknown to medicine- not a disease of theungs, liver, skin, heart, nerves, and so on mentioned in medicalooks, but a disease consisting of one of the innumerable combinationsf the maladies of those organs. This simple thought could not occuro the doctors (as it cannot occur to a wizard that he is unable toork his charms) because the business of their lives was to cure,nd they received money for it and had spent the best years of theirives on that business. But, above all, that thought was kept out ofheir minds by the fact that they saw they were really useful, as inact they were to the whole Rostov family. Their usefulness did notepend on making the patient swallow substances for the most partarmful (the harm was scarcely perceptible, as they were given inmall doses), but they were useful, necessary, and indispensableecause they satisfied a mental need of the invalid and of those whooved her- and that is why there are, and always will be,seudo-healers, wise women, homeopaths, and allopaths. Theyatisfied that eternal human need for hope of relief, for sympathy,nd that something should be done, which is felt by those who areuffering. They satisfied the need seen in its most elementary form in child, when it wants to have a place rubbed that has been hurt. Ahild knocks itself and runs at once to the arms of its mother orurse to have the aching spot rubbed or kissed, and it feels betterhen this is done. The child cannot believe that the strongest andisest of its people have no remedy for its pain, and the hope ofelief and the expression of its mother's sympathy while she rubshe bump comforts it. The doctors were of use to Natasha becausehey kissed and rubbed her bump, assuring her that it would soonass if only the coachman went to the chemist's in the Arbat and got aowder and some pills in a pretty box of a ruble and seventy kopeks,nd if she took those powders in boiled water at intervals ofrecisely two hours, neither more nor less.
	What would Sonya and the count and countess have done, how wouldhey have looked, if nothing had been done, if there had not beenhose pills to give by the clock, the warm drinks, the chickenutlets, and all the other details of life ordered by the doctors, thearrying out of which supplied an occupation and consolation to theamily circle? How would the count have borne his dearly lovedaughter's illness had he not known that it was costing him a thousandubles, and that he would not grudge thousands more to benefit her, orad he not known that if her illness continued he would not grudge yetther thousands and would take her abroad for consultations there, andad he not been able to explain the details of how Metivier and Fellerad not understood the symptoms, but Frise had, and Mudrov hadiagnosed them even better? What would the countess have done hadhe not been able sometimes to scold the invalid for not strictlybeying the doctor's orders?
	"You'll never get well like that," she would say, forgetting herrief in her vexation, "if you won't obey the doctor and take youredicine at the right time! You mustn't trifle with it, you know, ort may turn to pneumonia," she would go on, deriving much comfort fromhe utterance of that foreign word, incomprehensible to others as wells to herself.
	What would Sonya have done without the glad consciousness that shead not undressed during the first three nights, in order to beeady to carry out all the doctor's injunctions with precision, andhat she still kept awake at night so as not to miss the proper timehen the slightly harmful pills in the little gilt box had to bedministered? Even to Natasha herself it was pleasant to see that soany sacrifices were being made for her sake, and to know that she hado take medicine at certain hours, though she declared that noedicine would cure her and that it was all nonsense. And it wasven pleasant to be able to show, by disregarding the orders, that sheid not believe in medical treatment and did not value her life.
	The doctor came every day, felt her pulse, looked at her tongue, andegardless of her grief-stricken face joked with her. But when head gone into another room, to which the countess hurriedly followedim, he assumed a grave air and thoughtfully shaking his head saidhat though there was danger, he had hopes of the effect of thisast medicine and one must wait and see, that the malady was chieflyental, but... And the countess, trying to conceal the action fromerself and from him, slipped a gold coin into his hand and alwayseturned to the patient with a more tranquil mind.
	The symptoms of Natasha's illness were that she ate little, sleptittle, coughed, and was always low-spirited. The doctors said thathe could not get on without medical treatment, so they kept her inhe stifling atmosphere of the town, and the Rostovs did not move tohe country that summer of 1812.
	In spite of the many pills she swallowed and the drops and powdersut of the little bottles and boxes of which Madame Schoss who wasond of such things made a large collection, and in spite of beingeprived of the country life to which she was accustomed, youthrevailed. Natasha's grief began to be overlaid by the impressionsf daily life, it ceased to press so painfully on her heart, itradually faded into the past, and she began to recover physically.BK9|CH17
	CHAPTER XVII
	Natasha was calmer but no happier. She not merely avoided allxternal forms of pleasure- balls, promenades, concerts, and theaters-ut she never laughed without a sound of tears in her laughter. Sheould not sing. As soon as she began to laugh, or tried to sing byerself, tears choked her: tears of remorse, tears at the recollectionf those pure times which could never return, tears of vexation thathe should so uselessly have ruined her young life which might haveeen so happy. Laughter and singing in particular seemed to her like alasphemy, in face of her sorrow. Without any need ofelf-restraint, no wish to coquet ever entered her head. She saidnd felt at that time that no man was more to her than Nastasyavanovna, the buffoon. Something stood sentinel within her and forbadeer every joy. Besides, she had lost all the old interests of herarefree girlish life that had been so full of hope. The previousutumn, the hunting, "Uncle," and the Christmas holidays spent withicholas at Otradnoe were what she recalled oftenest and mostainfully. What would she not have given to bring back even a singleay of that time! But it was gone forever. Her presentiment at theime had not deceived her- that that state of freedom and readinessor any enjoyment would not return again. Yet it was necessary to liven.
	It comforted her to reflect that she was not better as she hadormerly imagined, but worse, much worse, than anybody else in theorld. But this was not enough. She knew that, and asked herself,What next?" But there was nothing to come. There was no joy inife, yet life was passing. Natasha apparently tried not to be aurden or a hindrance to anyone, but wanted nothing for herself. Sheept away from everyone in the house and felt at ease only with herrother Petya. She liked to be with him better than with the others,nd when alone with him she sometimes laughed. She hardly ever lefthe house and of those who came to see them was glad to see only oneerson, Pierre. It would have been impossible to treat her with moreelicacy, greater care, and at the same time more seriously than didount Bezukhov. Natasha unconsciously felt this delicacy and soound great pleasure in his society. But she was not even gratefulo him for it; nothing good on Pierre's part seemed to her to be anffort, it seemed so natural for him to be kind to everyone that thereas no merit in his kindness. Sometimes Natasha noticedmbarrassment and awkwardness on his part in her presence,specially when he wanted to do something to please her, or fearedhat something they spoke of would awaken memories distressing to her.he noticed this and attributed it to his general kindness andhyness, which she imagined must be the same toward everyone as it waso her. After those involuntary words- that if he were free he wouldave asked on his knees for her hand and her love- uttered at a momenthen she was so strongly agitated, Pierre never spoke to Natasha ofis feelings; and it seemed plain to her that those words, which hadhen so comforted her, were spoken as all sorts of meaningless wordsre spoken to comfort a crying child. It was not because Pierre was married man, but because Natasha felt very strongly with him thatoral barrier the absence of which she had experienced with Kuraginhat it never entered her head that the relations between him anderself could lead to love on her part, still less on his, or eveno the kind of tender, self-conscious, romantic friendship between aan and a woman of which she had known several instances.
	Before the end of the fast of St. Peter, Agrafena Ivanovna Belova, aountry neighbor of the Rostovs, came to Moscow to pay her devotionst the shrines of the Moscow saints. She suggested that Natasha shouldast and prepare for Holy Communion, and Natasha gladly welcomed thedea. Despite the doctor's orders that she should not go out earlyn the morning, Natasha insisted on fasting and preparing for theacrament, not as they generally prepared for it in the Rostovamily by attending three services in their own house, but as Agrafenavanovna did, by going to church every day for a week and not onceissing Vespers, Matins, or Mass.
	The countess was pleased with Natasha's zeal; after the poor resultsf the medical treatment, in the depths of her heart she hoped thatrayer might help her daughter more than medicines and, though notithout fear and concealing it from the doctor, she agreed toatasha's wish and entrusted her to Belova. Agrafena Ivanovna usedo come to wake Natasha at three in the morning, but generally founder already awake. She was afraid of being late for Matins. Hastilyashing, and meekly putting on her shabbiest dress and an oldantilla, Natasha, shivering in the fresh air, went out into theeserted streets lit by the clear light of dawn. By Agrafenavanovna's advice Natasha prepared herself not in their own parish,ut at a church where, according to the devout Agrafena Ivanovna,he priest was a man of very severe and lofty life. There were neverany people in the church; Natasha always stood beside Belova in theustomary place before an icon of the Blessed Virgin, let into thecreen before the choir on the left side, and a feeling, new to her,f humility before something great and incomprehensible, seized herhen at that unusual morning hour, gazing at the dark face of theirgin illuminated by the candles burning before it and by the morningight falling from the window, she listened to the words of theervice which she tried to follow with understanding. When shenderstood them her personal feeling became interwoven in therayers with shades of its own. When she did not understand, it wasweeter still to think that the wish to understand everything isride, that it is impossible to understand all, that it is onlyecessary to believe and to commit oneself to God, whom she feltuiding her soul at those moments. She crossed herself, bowed low, andhen she did not understand, in horror at her own vileness, simplysked God to forgive her everything, everything, to have mercy uponer. The prayers to which she surrendered herself most of all werehose of repentance. On her way home at an early hour when she meto one but bricklayers going to work or men sweeping the street, andverybody within the houses was still asleep, Natasha experienced aeeling new to her, a sense of the possibility of correcting heraults, the possibility of a new, clean life, and of happiness.
	During the whole week she spent in this way, that feeling grew everyay. And the happiness of taking communion, or "communing" as Agrafenavanovna, joyously playing with the word, called it, seemed to Natashao great that she felt she should never live till that blessed Sunday.
	But the happy day came, and on that memorable Sunday, when,ressed in white muslin, she returned home after communion, for theirst time for many months she felt calm and not oppressed by thehought of the life that lay before her.
	The doctor who came to see her that day ordered her to continuehe powders he had prescribed a fortnight previously.
	"She must certainly go on taking them morning and evening," said he,vidently sincerely satisfied with his success. "Only, please bearticular about it.
	"Be quite easy," he continued playfully, as he adroitly took theold coin in his palm. "She will soon be singing and frolicking about.he last medicine has done her a very great deal of good. She hasreshened up very much."
	The countess, with a cheerful expression on her face, looked down ater nails and spat a little for luck as she returned to the drawingoom.BK9|CH18
	CHAPTER XVIII
	At the beginning of July more and more disquieting reports about thear began to spread in Moscow; people spoke of an appeal by themperor to the people, and of his coming himself from the army tooscow. And as up to the eleventh of July no manifesto or appeal hadeen received, exaggerated reports became current about them and abouthe position of Russia. It was said that the Emperor was leaving thermy because it was in danger, it was said that Smolensk hadurrendered, that Napoleon had an army of a million and only a miracleould save Russia.
	On the eleventh of July, which was Saturday, the manifesto waseceived but was not yet in print, and Pierre, who was at theostovs', promised to come to dinner next day, Sunday, and bring aopy of the manifesto and appeal, which he would obtain from Countostopchin.
	That Sunday, the Rostovs went to Mass at the Razumovskis' privatehapel as usual. It was a hot July day. Even at ten o'clock, whenhe Rostovs got out of their carriage at the chapel, the sultry air,he shouts of hawkers, the light and gay summer clothes of therowd, the dusty leaves of the trees on the boulevard, the sounds ofhe band and the white trousers of a battalion marching to parade, theattling of wheels on the cobblestones, and the brilliant, hotunshine were all full of that summer languor, that content andiscontent with the present, which is most strongly felt on aright, hot day in town. All the Moscow notabilities, all the Rostovs'cquaintances, were at the Razumovskis' chapel, for, as if expectingomething to happen, many wealthy families who usually left town forheir country estates had not gone away that summer. As Natasha, ater mother's side, passed through the crowd behind a liveriedootman who cleared the way for them, she heard a young man speakingbout her in too loud a whisper.
	"That's Rostova, the one who..."
	"She's much thinner, but all the same she's pretty!"
	She heard, or thought she heard, the names of Kuragin and Bolkonski.ut she was always imagining that. It always seemed to her thatveryone who looked at her was thinking only of what had happened toer. With a sinking heart, wretched as she always was now when sheound herself in a crowd, Natasha in her lilac silk dress trimmed withlack lace walked- as women can walk- with the more repose andtateliness the greater the pain and shame in her soul. She knew forertain that she was pretty, but this no longer gave heratisfaction as it used to. On the contrary it tormented her more thannything else of late, and particularly so on this bright, hotummer day in town. "It's Sunday again- another week past," shehought, recalling that she had been here the Sunday before, "andlways the same life that is no life, and the same surroundings inhich it used to be so easy to live. I'm pretty, I'm young, and I knowhat now I am good. I used to be bad, but now I know I am good," shehought, "but yet my best years are slipping by and are no good tonyone." She stood by her mother's side and exchanged nods withcquaintances near her. From habit she scrutinized the ladies'resses, condemned the bearing of a lady standing close by who was notrossing herself properly but in a cramped manner, and again shehought with vexation that she was herself being judged and wasudging others, and suddenly, at the sound of the service, she feltorrified at her own vileness, horrified that the former purity of heroul was again lost to her.
	A comely, fresh-looking old man was conducting the service with thatild solemnity which has so elevating and soothing an effect on theouls of the worshipers. The gates of the sanctuary screen werelosed, the curtain was slowly drawn, and from behind it a softysterious voice pronounced some words. Tears, the cause of whichhe herself did not understand, made Natasha's breast heave, and aoyous but oppressive feeling agitated her.
	"Teach me what I should do, how to live my life, how I may grow goodorever, forever!" she pleaded.
	The deacon came out onto the raised space before the altar screennd, holding his thumb extended, drew his long hair from under hisalmatic and, making the sign of the cross on his breast, began in aoud and solemn voice to recite the words of the prayer...
	"In peace let us pray unto the Lord."
	"As one community, without distinction of class, without enmity,nited by brotherly love- let us pray!" thought Natasha.
	"For the peace that is from above, and for the salvation of ourouls."
	"For the world of angels and all the spirits who dwell above us,"rayed Natasha.
	When they prayed for the warriors, she thought of her brother andenisov. When they prayed for all traveling by land and sea, sheemembered Prince Andrew, prayed for him, and asked God to forgive herll the wrongs she had done him. When they prayed for those who loves, she prayed for the members of her own family, her father andother and Sonya, realizing for the first time how wrongly she hadcted toward them, and feeling all the strength of her love forhem. When they prayed for those who hate us, she tried to think ofer enemies and people who hated her, in order to pray for them. Shencluded among her enemies the creditors and all who had businessealings with her father, and always at the thought of enemies andhose who hated her she remembered Anatole who had done her so mucharm- and though he did not hate her she gladly prayed for him asor an enemy. Only at prayer did she feel able to think clearly andalmly of Prince Andrew and Anatole, as men for whom her feelings weres nothing compared with her awe and devotion to God. When they prayedor the Imperial family and the Synod, she bowed very low and made theign of the cross, saying to herself that even if she did notnderstand, still she could not doubt, and at any rate loved theoverning Synod and prayed for it.
	When he had finished the Litany the deacon crossed the stole overis breast and said, "Let us commit ourselves and our whole lives tohrist the Lord!"
	"Commit ourselves to God," Natasha inwardly repeated. "Lord God, Iubmit myself to Thy will!" she thought. "I want nothing, wish forothing; teach me what to do and how to use my will! Take me, takee!" prayed Natasha, with impatient emotion in her heart, not crossingerself but letting her slender arms hang down as if expecting somenvisible power at any moment to take her and deliver her fromerself, from her regrets, desires, remorse, hopes, and sins.
	The countess looked round several times at her daughter's softenedace and shining eyes and prayed God to help her.
	Unexpectedly, in the middle of the service, and not in the usualrder Natasha knew so well, the deacon brought out a small stool,he one he knelt on when praying on Trinity Sunday, and placed itefore the doors of the sanctuary screen. The priest came out with hisurple velvet biretta on his head, adjusted his hair, and knelt downith an effort. Everybody followed his example and they looked atne another in surprise. Then came the prayer just received from theynod- a prayer for the deliverance of Russia from hostile invasion.
	"Lord God of might, God of our salvation!" began the priest inhat voice, clear, not grandiloquent but mild, in which only thelav clergy read and which acts so irresistibly on a Russian heart.
	"Lord God of might, God of our salvation! Look this day in mercy andlessing on Thy humble people, and graciously hear us, spare us, andave mercy upon us! This foe confounding Thy land, desiring to layaste the whole world, rises against us; these lawless men areathered together to overthrow Thy kingdom, to destroy Thy dearerusalem, Thy beloved Russia; to defile Thy temples, to overthrowhine altars, and to desecrate our holy shrines. How long, O Lord, howong shall the wicked triumph? How long shall they wield unlawfulower?
	"Lord God! Hear us when we pray to Thee; strengthen with Thy mightur most gracious sovereign lord, the Emperor Alexander Pavlovich;e mindful of his uprightness and meekness, reward him according tois righteousness, and let it preserve us, Thy chosen Israel! Blessis counsels, his undertakings, and his work; strengthen his kingdomy Thine almighty hand, and give him victory over his enemy, even ashou gavest Moses the victory over Amalek, Gideon over Midian, andavid over Goliath. Preserve his army, put a bow of brass in the handsf those who have armed themselves in Thy Name, and gird their loinsith strength for the fight. Take up the spear and shield and arise toelp us; confound and put to shame those who have devised evil againsts, may they be before the faces of Thy faithful warriors as dustefore the wind, and may Thy mighty Angel confound them and put themo flight; may they be ensnared when they know it not, and may thelots they have laid in secret be turned against them; let them fallefore Thy servants' feet and be laid low by our hosts! Lord, Thou artble to save both great and small; Thou art God, and man cannotrevail against Thee!
	"God of our fathers! Remember Thy bounteous mercy andoving-kindness which are from of old; turn not Thy face from us,ut be gracious to our unworthiness, and in Thy great goodness and Thyany mercies regard not our transgressions and iniquities! Create ins a clean heart and renew a right spirit within us, strengthen us alln Thy faith, fortify our hope, inspire us with true love one fornother, arm us with unity of spirit in the righteous defense of theeritage Thou gavest to us and to our fathers, and let not the scepterf the wicked be exalted against the destiny of those Thou hastanctified.
	"O Lord our God, in whom we believe and in whom we put our trust,et us not be confounded in our hope of Thy mercy, and give us a tokenf Thy blessing, that those who hate us and our Orthodox faith may seet and be put to shame and perish, and may all the nations know thathou art the Lord and we are Thy people. Show Thy mercy upon us thisay, O Lord, and grant us Thy salvation; make the hearts of Thyervants to rejoice in Thy mercy; smite down our enemies and destroyhem swiftly beneath the feet of Thy faithful servants! For Thou arthe defense, the succor, and the victory of them that put theirrust in Thee, and to Thee be all glory, to Father, Son, and Holyhost, now and forever, world without end. Amen."
	In Natasha's receptive condition of soul this prayer affected hertrongly. She listened to every word about the victory of Moses overmalek, of Gideon over Midian, and of David over Goliath, and abouthe destruction of "Thy Jerusalem," and she prayed to God with theenderness and emotion with which her heart was overflowing, butithout fully understanding what she was asking of God in that prayer.he shared with all her heart in the prayer for the spirit ofighteousness, for the strengthening of the heart by faith and hope,nd its animation by love. But she could not pray that her enemiesight be trampled under foot when but a few minutes before she hadeen wishing she had more of them that she might pray for them. Buteither could she doubt the righteousness of the prayer that was beingead on bended knees. She felt in her heart a devout and tremulous awet the thought of the punishment that overtakes men for their sins,nd especially of her own sins, and she prayed to God to forgivehem all, and her too, and to give them all, and her too, peace andappiness. And it seemed to her that God heard her prayer.BK9|CH19
	CHAPTER XIX
	From the day when Pierre, after leaving the Rostovs' withatasha's grateful look fresh in his mind, had gazed at the comet thateemed to be fixed in the sky and felt that something new wasppearing on his own horizon- from that day the problem of theanity and uselessness of all earthly things, that had incessantlyormented him, no longer presented itself. That terrible questionWhy?" "Wherefore?" which had come to him amid every occupation, wasow replaced, not by another question or by a reply to the formeruestion, but by her image. When he listened to, or himself tookart in, trivial conversations, when he read or heard of humanaseness or folly, he was not horrified as formerly, and did not askimself why men struggled so about these things when all is soransient and incomprehensible- but he remembered her as he had lasteen her, and all his doubts vanished- not because she had answeredhe questions that had haunted him, but because his conception ofer transferred him instantly to another, a brighter, realm ofpiritual activity in which no one could be justified or guilty- aealm of beauty and love which it was worth living for. Whateverorldly baseness presented itself to him, he said to himself:
	"Well, supposing N. N. swindled the country and the Tsar, and theountry and the Tsar confer honors upon him, what does that matter?he smiled at me yesterday and asked me to come again, and I love her,nd no one will ever know it." And his soul felt calm and peaceful.
	Pierre still went into society, drank as much and led the samedle and dissipated life, because besides the hours he spent at theostovs' there were other hours he had to spend somehow, and theabits and acquaintances he had made in Moscow formed a current thatore him along irresistibly. But latterly, when more and moreisquieting reports came from the seat of war and Natasha's healthegan to improve and she no longer aroused in him the former feelingf careful pity, an ever-increasing restlessness, which he could notxplain, took possession of him. He felt that the condition he wasn could not continue long, that a catastrophe was coming whichould change his whole life, and he impatiently sought everywhereor signs of that approaching catastrophe. One of his brother Masonsad revealed to Pierre the following prophecy concerning Napoleon,rawn from the Revelation of St. John.
	In chapter 13, verse 18, of the Apocalypse, it is said:
	Here is wisdom. Let him that hath understanding count the numberf the beast: for it is the number of a man; and his number is Sixundred threescore and six.nd in the fifth verse of the same chapter:
	And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things andlasphemies; and power was given unto him to continue forty and twoonths.
	The French alphabet, written out with the same numerical values ashe Hebrew, in which the first nine letters denote units and thethers tens, will have the following significance:
	      a   b   c   d   e   f   g   h   i   k
	      1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10
	       l    m    n    o    p    q    r    s
	      20   30   40   50   60   70   80   90
	             t    u    v    w    x    y
	            100  110  120  130  140  150
	                        z
	                       160
	Writing the words L'Empereur Napoleon in numbers, it appears thathe sum of them is 666, and that Napoleon therefore the beast foretoldn the Apocalypse. Moreover, by applying the same system to theords quarante-deux,* which was the term allowed to the beast thatspoke great things and blasphemies," the same number 666 wasbtained; from which it followed that the limit fixed for Napoleon'sower had come in the year 1812 when the French emperor was forty-two.his prophecy pleased Pierre very much and he often asked himself whatould put an end to the power of the beast, that is, of Napoleon,nd tried by the same system of using letters as numbers and addinghem up, to find an answer to the question that engrossed him. Herote the words L'Empereur Alexandre, La nation russe and added upheir numbers, but the sums were either more or less than 666. Oncehen making such calculations he wrote down his own name in French,omte Pierre Besouhoff, but the sum of the numbers did not come right.hen he changed the spelling, substituting a z for the s and adding dend the article le, still without obtaining the desired result. Thent occurred to him: if the answer to the question were contained inis name, his nationality would also be given in the answer. So herote Le russe Besuhof and adding up the numbers got 671. This wasnly five too much, and five was represented by e, the very letterlided from the article le before the word Empereur. By omitting the, though incorrectly, Pierre got the answer he sought. L'russeesuhof made 666. This discovery excited him. How, or by what means,e was connected with the great event foretold in the Apocalypse heid not know, but he did not doubt that connection for a moment. Hisove for Natasha, Antichrist, Napoleon, the invasion, the comet,66, L'Empereur Napoleon, and L'russe Besuhof- all this had toature and culminate, to lift him out of that spellbound, petty spheref Moscow habits in which he felt himself held captive and lead him to great achievement and great happiness.
	*Forty-two.
	On the eve of the Sunday when the special prayer was read, Pierread promised the Rostovs to bring them, from Count Rostopchin whome knew well, both the appeal to the people and the news from thermy. In the morning, when he went to call at Rostopchin's he methere a courier fresh from the army, an acquaintance of his own, whoften danced at Moscow balls.
	"Do, please, for heaven's sake, relieve me of something!" said theourier. "I have a sackful of letters to parents."
	Among these letters was one from Nicholas Rostov to his father.ierre took that letter, and Rostopchin also gave him the Emperor'sppeal to Moscow, which had just been printed, the last army orders,nd his own most recent bulletin. Glancing through the army orders,ierre found in one of them, in the lists of killed, wounded, andewarded, the name of Nicholas Rostov, awarded a St. George's Cross ofhe Fourth Class for courage shown in the Ostrovna affair, and inhe same order the name of Prince Andrew Bolkonski, appointed to theommand of a regiment of Chasseurs. Though he did not want to remindhe Rostovs of Bolkonski, Pierre could not refrain from making themappy by the news of their son's having received a decoration, so heent that printed army order and Nicholas' letter to the Rostovs,eeping the appeal, the bulletin, and the other orders to take withim when he went to dinner.
	His conversation with Count Rostopchin and the latter's tone ofnxious hurry, the meeting with the courier who talked casually of howadly things were going in the army, the rumors of the discovery ofpies in Moscow and of a leaflet in circulation stating thatapoleon promised to be in both the Russian capitals by the autumn,nd the talk of the Emperor's being expected to arrive next day- allroused with fresh force that feeling of agitation and expectationn Pierre which he had been conscious of ever since the appearancef the comet, and especially since the beginning of the war.
	He had long been thinking of entering the army and would have doneo had he not been hindered, first, by his membership of the Societyf Freemasons to which he was bound by oath and which preachederpetual peace and the abolition of war, and secondly, by the facthat when he saw the great mass of Muscovites who had donned uniformnd were talking patriotism, he somehow felt ashamed to take the step.ut the chief reason for not carrying out his intention to enter thermy lay in the vague idea that he was L'russe Besuhof who had theumber of the beast, 666; that his part in the great affair of setting limit to the power of the beast that spoke great and blasphemoushings had been predestined from eternity, and that therefore he oughtot to undertake anything, but wait for what was bound to come toass.BK9|CH20
	CHAPTER XX
	A few intimate friends were dining with the Rostovs that day, assual on Sundays.
	Pierre came early so as to find them alone.
	He had grown so stout this year that he would have been abnormal hade not been so tall, so broad of limb, and so strong that he carriedis bulk with evident ease.
	He went up the stairs, puffing and muttering something. His coachmanid not even ask whether he was to wait. He knew that when hisaster was at the Rostovs' he stayed till midnight. The Rostovs'ootman rushed eagerly forward to help him off with his cloak and takeis hat and stick. Pierre, from club habit, always left both hat andtick in the anteroom.
	The first person he saw in the house was Natasha. Even before he sawer, while taking off his cloak, he heard her. She was practicingolfa exercises in the music room. He knew that she had not sung sinceer illness, and so the sound of her voice surprised and delightedim. He opened the door softly and saw her, in the lilac dress she hadorn at church, walking about the room singing. She had her back toim when he opened the door, but when, turning quickly, she saw hisroad, surprised face, she blushed and came rapidly up to him.
	"I want to try to sing again," she said, adding as if by way ofxcuse, "it is, at least, something to do."
	"That's capital!"
	"How glad I am you've come! I am so happy today," she said, with theld animation Pierre had not seen in her for along time. "You knowicholas has received a St. George's Cross? I am so proud of him."
	"Oh yes, I sent that announcement. But I don't want to interruptou," he added, and was about to go to the drawing room.
	Natasha stopped him.
	"Count, is it wrong of me to sing?" she said blushing, and fixinger eyes inquiringly on him.
	"No... Why should it be? On the contrary... But why do you ask me?"
	"I don't know myself," Natasha answered quickly, "but I should notike to do anything you disapproved of. I believe in you completely.ou don't know how important you are to me, how much you've done fore...." She spoke rapidly and did not notice how Pierre flushed at herords. "I saw in that same army order that he, Bolkonski" (shehispered the name hastily), "is in Russia, and in the army again.hat do you think?"- she was speaking hurriedly, evidently afraider strength might fail her- "Will he ever forgive me? Will he notlways have a bitter feeling toward me? What do you think? What do youhink?"
	"I think..." Pierre replied, "that he has nothing to forgive....f I were in his place..."
	By association of ideas, Pierre was at once carried back to theay when, trying to comfort her, he had said that if he were notimself but the best man in the world and free, he would ask on hisnees for her hand; and the same feeling of pity, tenderness, and loveook possession of him and the same words rose to his lips. But sheid not give him time to say them.
	"Yes, you... you..." she said, uttering the word you rapturously-that's a different thing. I know no one kinder, more generous, oretter than you; nobody could be! Had you not been there then, and nowoo, I don't know what would have become of me, because..."
	Tears suddenly rose in her eyes, she turned away, lifted her musicefore her eyes, began singing again, and again began walking up andown the room.
	Just then Petya came running in from the drawing room.
	Petya was now a handsome rosy lad of fifteen with full red lipsnd resembled Natasha. He was preparing to enter the university, bute and his friend Obolenski had lately, in secret, agreed to joinhe hussars.
	Petya had come rushing out to talk to his namesake about thisffair. He had asked Pierre to find out whether he would be acceptedn the hussars.
	Pierre walked up and down the drawing room, not listening to whatetya was saying.
	Petya pulled him by the arm to attract his attention.
	"Well, what about my plan? Peter Kirilych, for heaven's sake! Youre my only hope " said Petya.
	"Oh yes, your plan. To join the hussars? I'll mention it, I'll bringt all up today."
	"Well, mon cher, have you got the manifesto?" asked the old count.The countess has been to Mass at the Razumovskis' and heard the newrayer. She says it's very fine."
	"Yes, I've got it," said Pierre. "The Emperor is to be hereomorrow... there's to be an Extraordinary Meeting of the nobility,nd they are talking of a levy of ten men per thousand. Oh yes, let meongratulate you!"
	"Yes, yes, thank God! Well, and what news from the army?"
	"We are again retreating. They say we're already near Smolensk,"eplied Pierre.
	"O Lord, O Lord!" exclaimed the count. "Where is the manifesto?"
	"The Emperor's appeal? Oh yes!"
	Pierre began feeling in his pockets for the papers, but could notind them. Still slapping his pockets, he kissed the hand of theountess who entered the room and glanced uneasily around, evidentlyxpecting Natasha, who had left off singing but had not yet comento the drawing room.
	"On my word, I don't know what I've done with it," he said.
	"There he is, always losing everything!" remarked the countess.
	Natasha entered with a softened and agitated expression of facend sat down looking silently at Pierre. As soon as she entered,ierre's features, which had been gloomy, suddenly lighted up, andhile still searching for the papers he glanced at her several times.
	"No, really! I'll drive home, I must have left them there. I'llertainly..."
	"But you'll be late for dinner."
	"Oh! And my coachman has gone."
	But Sonya, who had gone to look for the papers in the anteroom,ad found them in Pierre's hat, where he had carefully tucked themnder the lining. Pierre was about to begin reading.
	"No, after dinner," said the old count, evidently expecting muchnjoyment from that reading.
	At dinner, at which champagne was drunk to the health of the newhevalier of St. George, Shinshin told them the town news, of thellness of the old Georgian princess, of Metivier's disappearance fromoscow, and of how some German fellow had been brought to Rostopchinnd accused of being a French "spyer" (so Count Rostopchin had toldhe story), and how Rostopchin let him go and assured the peoplehat he was "not a spire at all, but only an old German ruin."
	"People are being arrested..." said the count. "I've told theountess she should not speak French so much. It's not the time for itow."
	"And have you heard?" Shinshin asked. "Prince Golitsyn has engaged aaster to teach him Russian. It is becoming dangerous to speakrench in the streets."
	"And how about you, Count Peter Kirilych? If they call up theilitia, you too will have to mount a horse," remarked the oldount, addressing Pierre.
	Pierre had been silent and preoccupied all through dinner, seemingot to grasp what was said. He looked at the count.
	"Oh yes, the war," he said. "No! What sort of warrior should I make?nd yet everything is so strange, so strange! I can't make it out. Ion't know, I am very far from having military tastes, but in theseimes no one can answer for himself."
	After dinner the count settled himself comfortably in an easyhair and with a serious face asked Sonya, who was considered anxcellent reader, to read the appeal.
	"To Moscow, our ancient Capital!
	"The enemy has entered the borders of Russia with immense forces. Heomes to despoil our beloved country,"
	Sonya read painstakingly in her high-pitched voice. The countistened with closed eyes, heaving abrupt sighs at certain passages.
	Natasha sat erect, gazing with a searching look now at her fathernd now at Pierre.
	Pierre felt her eyes on him and tried not to look round. Theountess shook her head disapprovingly and angrily at every solemnxpression in the manifesto. In all these words she saw only thathe danger threatening her son would not soon be over. Shinshin,ith a sarcastic smile on his lips, was evidently preparing to makeun of anything that gave him the opportunity: Sonya's reading, anyemark of the count's, or even the manifesto itself should no betterretext present itself.
	After reading about the dangers that threatened Russia, the hopeshe Emperor placed on Moscow and especially on its illustriousobility, Sonya, with a quiver in her voice due chiefly to thettention that was being paid to her, read the last words:
	"We ourselves will not delay to appear among our people in thatapital and in others parts of our realm for consultation, and for theirection of all our levies, both those now barring the enemy's pathnd those freshly formed to defeat him wherever he may appear. May theuin he hopes to bring upon us recoil on his own head, and mayurope delivered from bondage glorify the name of Russia!"
	"Yes, that's it!" cried the count, opening his moist eyes andniffing repeatedly, as if a strong vinaigrette had been held to hisose; and he added, "Let the Emperor but say the word and we'llacrifice everything and begrudge nothing."
	Before Shinshin had time to utter the joke he was ready to make onhe count's patriotism, Natasha jumped up from her place and ran toer father.
	"What a darling our Papa is!" she cried, kissing him, and shegain looked at Pierre with the unconscious coquetry that had returnedo her with her better spirits.
	"There! Here's a patriot for you!" said Shinshin.
	"Not a patriot at all, but simply..." Natasha replied in annjured tone. "Everything seems funny to you, but this isn't at all joke...."
	"A joke indeed!" put in the count. "Let him but say the word ande'll all go.... We're not Germans!"
	"But did you notice, it says, 'for consultation'?" said Pierre.
	"Never mind what it's for...."
	At this moment, Petya, to whom nobody was paying any attention, camep to his father with a very flushed face and said in his breakingoice that was now deep and now shrill:
	"Well, Papa, I tell you definitely, and Mamma too, it's as youlease, but I say definitely that you must let me enter the army,ecause I can't... that's all...."
	The countess, in dismay, looked up to heaven, clasped her hands, andurned angrily to her husband.
	"That comes of your talking!" said she.
	But the count had already recovered from his excitement.
	"Come, come!" said he. "Here's a fine warrior! No! Nonsense! Youust study."
	"It's not nonsense, Papa. Fedya Obolenski is younger than I, ande's going too. Besides, all the same I can't study now when..." Petyatopped short, flushed till he perspired, but still got out the words,when our Fatherland is in danger."
	"That'll do, that'll do- nonsense...."
	"But you said yourself that we would sacrifice everything."
	"Petya! Be quiet, I tell you!" cried the count, with a glance at hisife, who had turned pale and was staring fixedly at her son.
	"And I tell you- Peter Kirilych here will also tell you..."
	"Nonsense, I tell you. Your mother's milk has hardly dried on yourips and you want to go into the army! There, there, I tell you,"nd the count moved to go out of the room, taking the papers, probablyo reread them in his study before having a nap.
	"Well, Peter Kirilych, let's go and have a smoke," he said.
	Pierre was agitated and undecided. Natasha's unwontedly brilliantyes, continually glancing at him with a more than cordial look, hadeduced him to this condition.
	"No, I think I'll go home."
	"Home? Why, you meant to spend the evening with us.... You don'tften come nowadays as it is, and this girl of mine," said the countood-naturedly, pointing to Natasha, "only brightens up when you'reere."
	"Yes, I had forgotten... I really must go home... business..."aid Pierre hurriedly.
	"Well, then, au revoir!" said the count, and went out of the room.
	"Why are you going? Why are you upset?" asked Natasha, and sheooked challengingly into Pierre's eyes.
	"Because I love you!" was what he wanted to say, but he did notay it, and only blushed till the tears came, and lowered his eyes.
	"Because it is better for me to come less often... because... No,imply I have business...."
	"Why? No, tell me!" Natasha began resolutely and suddenly stopped.
	They looked at each other with dismayed and embarrassed faces. Heried to smile but could not: his smile expressed suffering, and heilently kissed her hand and went out.
	Pierre made up his mind not to go to the Rostovs' any more.BK9|CH21
	CHAPTER XXI
	After the definite refusal he had received, Petya went to his roomnd there locked himself in and wept bitterly. When he came in to tea,ilent, morose, and with tear-stained face, everybody pretended not tootice anything.
	Next day the Emperor arrived in Moscow, and several of theostovs' domestic serfs begged permission to go to have a look at him.hat morning Petya was a long time dressing and arranging his hair andollar to look like a grown-up man. He frowned before his lookinglass, gesticulated, shrugged his shoulders, and finally, withoutaying a word to anyone, took his cap and left the house by the backoor, trying to avoid notice. Petya decided to go straight to wherehe Emperor was and to explain frankly to some gentleman-in-waitinghe imagined the Emperor to be always surrounded byentlemen-in-waiting) that he, Count Rostov, in spite of his youthished to serve his country; that youth could be no hindrance tooyalty, and that he was ready to... While dressing, Petya hadrepared many fine things he meant to say to the gentleman-in-waiting.
	It was on the very fact of being so young that Petya counted foruccess in reaching the Emperor- he even thought how surprisedveryone would be at his youthfulness- and yet in the arrangement ofis collar and hair and by his sedate deliberate walk he wished toppear a grown-up man. But the farther he went and the more histtention was diverted by the ever-increasing crowds moving toward theremlin, the less he remembered to walk with the sedateness andeliberation of a man. As he approached the Kremlin he even began tovoid being crushed and resolutely stuck out his elbows in aenacing way. But within the Trinity Gateway he was so pressed tohe wall by people who probably were unaware of the patrioticntentions with which he had come that in spite of all hisetermination he had to give in, and stop while carriages passed in,umbling beneath the archway. Beside Petya stood a peasant woman, aootman, two tradesmen, and a discharged soldier. After standingome time in the gateway, Petya tried to move forward in front ofhe others without waiting for all the carriages to pass, and he beganesolutely working his way with his elbows, but the woman just inront of him, who was the first against whom he directed hisfforts, angrily shouted at him:
	"What are you shoving for, young lordling? Don't you see we're alltanding still? Then why push?"
	"Anybody can shove," said the footman, and also began working hislbows to such effect that he pushed Petya into a very filthy cornerf the gateway.
	Petya wiped his perspiring face with his hands and pulled up theamp collar which he had arranged so well at home to seem like aan's.
	He felt that he no longer looked presentable, and feared that ife were now to approach the gentlemen-in-waiting in that plight heould not be admitted to the Emperor. But it was impossible to smartenneself up or move to another place, because of the crowd. One ofhe generals who drove past was an acquaintance of the Rostovs', andetya thought of asking his help, but came to the conclusion that thatould not be a manly thing to do. When the carriages had all passedn, the crowd, carrying Petya with it, streamed forward into theremlin Square which was already full of people. There were people notnly in the square, but everywhere- on the slopes and on the roofs. Asoon as Petya found himself in the square he clearly heard the soundf bells and the joyous voices of the crowd that filled the wholeremlin.
	For a while the crowd was less dense, but suddenly all heads wereared, and everyone rushed forward in one direction. Petya was beingressed so that he could scarcely breathe, and everybody shouted,Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah!" Petya stood on tiptoe and pushed andinched, but could see nothing except the people about him.
	All the faces bore the same expression of excitement and enthusiasm. tradesman's wife standing beside Petya sobbed, and the tears ranown her cheeks.
	"Father! Angel! Dear one!" she kept repeating, wiping away her tearsith her fingers.
	"Hurrah!" was heard on all sides.
	For a moment the crowd stood still, but then it made another rushorward.
	Quite beside himself, Petya, clinching his teeth and rolling hisyes ferociously, pushed forward, elbowing his way and shoutinghurrah!" as if he were prepared that instant to kill himself andveryone else, but on both sides of him other people with similarlyerocious faces pushed forward and everybody shouted "hurrah!"
	"So this is what the Emperor is!" thought Petya. "No, I can'tetition him myself- that would be too bold." But in spite of thise continued to struggle desperately forward, and from between theacks of those in front he caught glimpses of an open space with atrip of red cloth spread out on it; but just then the crowd swayedack- the police in front were pushing back those who had pressedoo close to the procession: the Emperor was passing from the palaceo the Cathedral of the Assumption- and Petya unexpectedly receiveduch a blow on his side and ribs and was squeezed so hard thatuddenly everything grew dim before his eyes and he lostonsciousness. When he came to himself, a man of clerical appearanceith a tuft of gray hair at the back of his head and wearing ahabby blue cassock- probably a church clerk and chanter- wasolding him under the arm with one hand while warding off the pressuref the crowd with the other.
	"You've crushed the young gentleman!" said the clerk. "What areou up to? Gently!... They've crushed him, crushed him!"
	The Emperor entered the Cathedral of the Assumption. The crowdpread out again more evenly, and the clerk led Petya- pale andreathless- to the Tsar-cannon. Several people were sorry for Petya,nd suddenly a crowd turned toward him and pressed round him. Thoseho stood nearest him attended to him, unbuttoned his coat, seated himn the raised platform of the cannon, and reproached those otherswhoever they might be) who had crushed him.
	"One might easily get killed that way! What do they mean by it?illing people! Poor dear, he's as white as a sheet!"- variousoices were heard saying.
	Petya soon came to himself, the color returned to his face, the painad passed, and at the cost of that temporary unpleasantness he hadbtained a place by the cannon from where he hoped to see themperor who would be returning that way. Petya no longer thought ofresenting his petition. If he could only see the Emperor he woulde happy!
	While the service was proceeding in the Cathedral of the Assumption-t was a combined service of prayer on the occasion of the Emperor'srrival and of thanksgiving for the conclusion of peace with theurks- the crowd outside spread out and hawkers appeared, sellingvas, gingerbread, and poppyseed sweets (of which Petya wasarticularly fond), and ordinary conversation could again be heard. tradesman's wife was showing a rent in her shawl and telling howuch the shawl had cost; another was saying that all silk goods hadow got dear. The clerk who had rescued Petya was talking to aunctionary about the priests who were officiating that day with theishop. The clerk several times used the word "plenary" (of theervice), a word Petya did not understand. Two young citizens wereoking with some serf girls who were cracking nuts. All theseonversations, especially the joking with the girls, were such asight have had a particular charm for Petya at his age, but they didot interest him now. He sat on his elevation- the pedestal of theannon- still agitated as before by the thought of the Emperor andy his love for him. The feeling of pain and fear he had experiencedhen he was being crushed, together with that of rapture, stillurther intensified his sense of the importance of the occasion.
	Suddenly the sound of a firing of cannon was heard from thembankment, to celebrate the signing of peace with the Turks, andhe crowd rushed impetuously toward the embankment to watch theiring. Petya too would have run there, but the clerk who had takenhe young gentleman under his protection stopped him. The firing wastill proceeding when officers, generals, and gentlemen-in-waitingame running out of the cathedral, and after them others in a moreeisurely manner: caps were again raised, and those who had run toook at the cannon ran back again. At last four men in uniforms andashes emerged from the cathedral doors. "Hurrah! hurrah!" shouted therowd again.
	"Which is he? Which?" asked Petya in a tearful voice, of thoseround him, but no one answered him, everybody was too excited; andetya, fixing on one of those four men, whom he could not clearlyee for the tears of joy that filled his eyes, concentrated all hisnthusiasm on him- though it happened not to be the Emperor-rantically shouted "Hurrah!" and resolved that tomorrow, come whatight, he would join the army.
	The crowd ran after the Emperor, followed him to the palace, andegan to disperse. It was already late, and Petya had not eatennything and was drenched with perspiration, yet he did not go homeut stood with that diminishing, but still considerable, crowdefore the palace while the Emperor dined- looking in at the palaceindows, expecting he knew not what, and envying alike the notables heaw arriving at the entrance to dine with the Emperor and the courtootmen who served at table, glimpses of whom could be seen throughhe windows.
	While the Emperor was dining, Valuev, looking out of the window,aid:
	"The people are still hoping to see Your Majesty again."
	The dinner was nearly over, and the Emperor, munching a biscuit,ose and went out onto the balcony. The people, with Petya among them,ushed toward the balcony.
	"Angel! Dear one! Hurrah! Father!..." cried the crowd, and Petyaith it, and again the women and men of weaker mold, Petya among them,ept with joy.
	A largish piece of the biscuit the Emperor was holding in his handroke off, fell on the balcony parapet, and then to the ground. Aoachman in a jerkin, who stood nearest, sprang forward and snatchedt up. Several people in the crowd rushed at the coachman. Seeing thishe Emperor had a plateful of biscuits brought him and beganhrowing them down from the balcony. Petya's eyes grew bloodshot,nd still more excited by the danger of being crushed, he rushed athe biscuits. He did not know why, but he had to have a biscuit fromhe Tsar's hand and he felt that he must not give way. He sprangorward and upset an old woman who was catching at a biscuit; theld woman did not consider herself defeated though she was lying onhe ground- she grabbed at some biscuits but her hand did not reachhem. Petya pushed her hand away with his knee, seized a biscuit,nd as if fearing to be too late, again shouted "Hurrah!" with a voicelready hoarse.
	The Emperor went in, and after that the greater part of the crowdegan to disperse.
	"There! I said if only we waited- and so it was!" was being joyfullyaid by various people.
	Happy as Petya was, he felt sad at having to go home knowing thatll the enjoyment of that day was over. He did not go straight homerom the Kremlin, but called on his friend Obolenski, who wasifteen and was also entering the regiment. On returning home Petyannounced resolutely and firmly that if he was not allowed to enterhe service he would run away. And next day, Count Ilya Rostov- thoughe had not yet quite yielded- went to inquire how he could arrange foretya to serve where there would be least danger.BK9|CH22
	CHAPTER XXII
	Two days later, on the fifteenth of July, an immense number ofarriages were standing outside the Sloboda Palace.
	The great halls were full. In the first were the nobility and gentryn their uniforms, in the second bearded merchants in full-skirtedoats of blue cloth and wearing medals. in the noblemen's hall thereas an incessant movement and buzz of voices. The chief magnates satn high-backed chairs at a large table under the portrait of themperor, but most of the gentry were strolling about the room.
	All these nobles, whom Pierre met every day at the Club or inheir own houses, were in uniform- some in that of Catherine's day,thers in that of Emperor Paul, others again in the new uniforms oflexander's time or the ordinary uniform of the nobility, and theeneral characteristic of being in uniform imparted somethingtrange and fantastic to these diverse and familiar personalities,oth old and young. The old men, dim-eyed, toothless, bald, sallow,nd bloated, or gaunt and wrinkled, were especially striking. Forhe most part they sat quietly in their places and were silent, or, ifhey walked about and talked, attached themselves to someoneounger. On all these faces, as on the faces of the crowd Petya hadeen in the Square, there was a striking contradiction: the generalxpectation of a solemn event, and at the same time the everydaynterests in a boston card party, Peter the cook, Zinaida Dmitrievna'sealth, and so on.
	Pierre was there too, buttoned up since early morning in aobleman's uniform that had become too tight for him. He was agitated;his extraordinary gathering not only of nobles but also of theerchant-class- les etats generaux (States-General)- evoked in him ahole series of ideas he had long laid aside but which were deeplyraven in his soul: thoughts of the Contrat social and the Frenchevolution. The words that had struck him in the Emperor's appeal-hat the sovereign was coming to the capital for consultation with hiseople- strengthened this idea. And imagining that in this directionomething important which he had long awaited was drawing near, hetrolled about watching and listening to conversations, but nowhereinding any confirmation of the ideas that occupied him.
	The Emperor's manifesto was read, evoking enthusiasm, and then alloved about discussing it. Besides the ordinary topics ofonversation, Pierre heard questions of where the marshals of theobility were to stand when the Emperor entered, when a ball should beiven in the Emperor's honor, whether they should group themselvesy districts or by whole provinces... and so on; but as soon as thear was touched on, or what the nobility had been convened for, thealk became undecided and indefinite. Then all preferred listeningo speaking.
	A middle-aged man, handsome and virile, in the uniform of aetired naval officer, was speaking in one of the rooms, and a smallrowd was pressing round him. Pierre went up to the circle that hadormed round the speaker and listened. Count Ilya Rostov, in ailitary uniform of Catherine's time, was sauntering with a pleasantmile among the crowd, with all of whom he was acquainted. He toopproached that group and listened with a kindly smile and nods ofpproval, as he always did, to what the speaker was saying. Theetired naval man was speaking very boldly, as was evident from thexpression on the faces of the listeners and from the fact that someeople Pierre knew as the meekest and quietest of men walked awayisapprovingly or expressed disagreement with him. Pierre pushed hisay into the middle of the group, listened, and convinced himself thathe man was indeed a liberal, but of views quite different from hiswn. The naval officer spoke in a particularly sonorous, musical,nd aristocratic baritone voice, pleasantly swallowing his r's andenerally slurring his consonants: the voice of a man calling out tois servant, "Heah! Bwing me my pipe!" It was indicative ofissipation and the exercise of authority.
	"What if the Smolensk people have offahd to waise militia for thempewah? Ah we to take Smolensk as our patte'n? If the noblewistocwacy of the pwovince of Moscow thinks fit, it can show itsoyalty to our sov'weign the Empewah in other ways. Have weo'gotten the waising of the militia in the yeah 'seven? All thatid was to enwich the pwiests' sons and thieves and wobbahs...."
	Count Ilya Rostov smiled blandly and nodded approval.
	"And was our militia of any use to the Empia? Not at all! It onlyuined our farming! Bettah have another conscwiption... o' ou' menill wetu'n neithah soldiers no' peasants, and we'll get onlyepwavity fwom them. The nobility don't gwudge theah lives- evewyne of us will go and bwing in more wecwuits, and the sov'weign" (thatas the way he referred to the Emperor) "need only say the word ande'll all die fo' him!" added the orator with animation.
	Count Rostov's mouth watered with pleasure and he nudged Pierre, butierre wanted to speak himself. He pushed forward, feeling stirred,ut not yet sure what stirred him or what he would say. Scarcely hade opened his mouth when one of the senators, a man without a tooth inis head, with a shrewd though angry expression, standing near theirst speaker, interrupted him. Evidently accustomed to managingebates and to maintaining an argument, he began in low but distinctones:
	"I imagine, sir," said he, mumbling with his toothless mouth,that we have been summoned here not to discuss whether it's bestor the empire at the present moment to adopt conscription or toall out the militia. We have been summoned to reply to the appealith which our sovereign the Emperor has honored us. But to judge whats best- conscription or the militia- we can leave to the supremeuthority...."
	Pierre suddenly saw an outlet for his excitement. He hardened hiseart against the senator who was introducing this set and narrowttitude into the deliberations of the nobility. Pierre steppedorward and interrupted him. He himself did not yet know what he woulday, but he began to speak eagerly, occasionally lapsing into Frenchr expressing himself in bookish Russian.
	"Excuse me, your excellency," he began. (He was well acquainted withhe senator, but thought it necessary on this occasion to addressim formally.) "Though I don't agree with the gentleman..." (heesitated: he wished to say, "Mon tres honorable preopinant"- "My veryonorable opponent") "with the gentleman... whom I have not theonor of knowing, I suppose that the nobility have been summoned noterely to express their sympathy and enthusiasm but also to considerhe means by which we can assist our Fatherland! I imagine," he wentn, warming to his subject, "that the Emperor himself would not beatisfied to find in us merely owners of serfs whom we are willingo devote to his service, and chair a canon* we are ready to make ofurselves- and not to obtain from us any co-co-counsel."
	*"Food for cannon."
	Many persons withdrew from the circle, noticing the senator'sarcastic smile and the freedom of Pierre's remarks. Only Count Rostovas pleased with them as he had been pleased with those of the navalfficer, the senator, and in general with whatever speech he hadast heard.
	"I think that before discussing these questions," Pierreontinued, "we should ask the Emperor- most respectfully ask Hisajesty- to let us know the number of our troops and the position inhich our army and our forces now are, and then..."
	But scarcely had Pierre uttered these words before he was attackedrom three sides. The most vigorous attack came from an oldcquaintance, a boston player who had always been well disposed towardim, Stepan Stepanovich Adraksin. Adraksin was in uniform, and whethers a result of the uniform or from some other cause Pierre sawefore him quite a different man. With a sudden expression ofalevolence on his aged face, Adraksin shouted at Pierre:
	"In the first place, I tell you we have no right to question themperor about that, and secondly, if the Russian nobility had thatight, the Emperor could not answer such a question. The troops areoved according to the enemy's movements and the number of menncreases and decreases..."
	Another voice, that of a nobleman of medium height and about fortyears of age, whom Pierre had formerly met at the gypsies' and knew as bad cardplayer, and who, also transformed by his uniform, came up toierre, interrupted Adraksin.
	"Yes, and this is not a time for discussing," he continued, "but forcting: there is war in Russia! The enemy is advancing to destroyussia, to desecrate the tombs of our fathers, to carry off ourives and children." The nobleman smote his breast. "We will allrise, every one of us will go, for our father the Tsar!" hehouted, rolling his bloodshot eyes. Several approving voices wereeard in the crowd. "We are Russians and will not grudge our bloodn defense of our faith, the throne, and the Fatherland! We must ceaseaving if we are sons of our Fatherland! We will show Europe howussia rises to the defense of Russia!"
	Pierre wished to reply, but could not get in a word. He felt thatis words, apart from what meaning they conveyed, were less audiblehan the sound of his opponent's voice.
	Count Rostov at the back of the crowd was expressing approval;everal persons, briskly turning a shoulder to the orator at the endf a phrase, said:
	"That's right, quite right! Just so!"
	Pierre wished to say that he was ready to sacrifice his money, hiserfs, or himself, only one ought to know the state of affairs inrder to be able to improve it, but he was unable to speak. Manyoices shouted and talked at the same time, so that Count Rostov hadot time to signify his approval of them all, and the group increased,ispersed, re-formed, and then moved with a hum of talk into theargest hall and to the big table. Not only was Pierre's attempt topeak unsuccessful, but he was rudely interrupted, pushed aside, andeople turned away from him as from a common enemy. This happenedot because they were displeased by the substance of his speech, whichad even been forgotten after the many subsequent speeches, but tonimate it the crowd needed a tangible object to love and a tangiblebject to hate. Pierre became the latter. Many other orators spokefter the excited nobleman, and all in the same tone. Many spokeloquently and with originality.
	Glinka, the editor of the Russian Messenger, who was recognizedcries of "author! author!" were heard in the crowd), said thathell must be repulsed by hell," and that he had seen a childmiling at lightning flashes and thunderclaps, but "we will not behat child."
	"Yes, yes, at thunderclaps!" was repeated approvingly in the backows of the crowd.
	The crowd drew up to the large table, at which sat gray-haired orald seventy-year-old magnates, uniformed and besashed almost all ofhom Pierre had seen in their own homes with their buffoons, orlaying boston at the clubs. With an incessant hum of voices the crowddvanced to the table. Pressed by the throng against the high backs ofhe chairs, the orators spoke one after another and sometimes twoogether. Those standing behind noticed what a speaker omitted toay and hastened to supply it. Others in that heat and crush rackedheir brains to find some thought and hastened to utter it. The oldagnates, whom Pierre knew, sat and turned to look first at one andhen at another, and their faces for the most part only expressedhe fact that they found it very hot. Pierre, however, felt excited,nd the general desire to show that they were ready to go to allengths- which found expression in the tones and looks more than inhe substance of the speeches- infected him too. He did not renounceis opinions, but felt himself in some way to blame and wished toustify himself.
	"I only said that it would be more to the purpose to make sacrificeshen we know what is needed!" said he, trying to be heard above thether voices.
	One of the old men nearest to him looked round, but his attentionas immediately diverted by an exclamation at the other side of theable.
	"Yes, Moscow will be surrendered! She will be our expiation!"houted one man.
	"He is the enemy of mankind!" cried another. "Allow me to speak...."Gentlemen, you are crushing me!..."BK9|CH23
	CHAPTER XXIII
	At that moment Count Rostopchin with his protruding chin and alertyes, wearing the uniform of a general with sash over his shoulder,ntered the room, stepping briskly to the front of the crowd ofentry.
	"Our sovereign the Emperor will be here in a moment," saidostopchin. "I am straight from the palace. Seeing the position we aren, I think there is little need for discussion. The Emperor haseigned to summon us and the merchants. Millions will pour forthrom there"- he pointed to the merchants' hall- "but our business iso supply men and not spare ourselves... That is the least we can do!"
	A conference took place confined to the magnates sitting at theable. The whole consultation passed more than quietly. After allhe preceding noise the sound of their old voices saying one afternother, "I agree," or for variety, "I too am of that opinion," and son had even a mournful effect.
	The secretary was told to write down the resolution of the Moscowobility and gentry, that they would furnish ten men, fullyquipped, out of every thousand serfs, as the Smolensk gentry hadone. Their chairs made a scraping noise as the gentlemen who hadonferred rose with apparent relief, and began walking up and down,rm in arm, to stretch their legs and converse in couples.
	"The Emperor! The Emperor!" a sudden cry resounded through the hallsnd the whole throng hurried to the entrance.
	The Emperor entered the hall through a broad path between twoines of nobles. Every face expressed respectful, awe-struckuriosity. Pierre stood rather far off and could not hear all that themperor said. From what he did hear he understood that the Emperorpoke of the danger threatening the empire and of the hopes helaced on the Moscow nobility. He was answered by a voice whichnformed him of the resolution just arrived at.
	"Gentlemen!" said the Emperor with a quivering voice.
	There was a rustling among the crowd and it again subsided, sohat Pierre distinctly heard the pleasantly human voice of the Emperoraying with emotion:
	"I never doubted the devotion of the Russian nobles, but today itas surpassed my expectations. I thank you in the name of theatherland! Gentlemen, let us act! Time is most precious..."
	The Emperor ceased speaking, the crowd began pressing round him, andapturous exclamations were heard from all sides.
	"Yes, most precious... a royal word," said Count Rostov, with a sob.e stood at the back, and, though he had heard hardly anything,nderstood everything in his own way.
	From the hall of the nobility the Emperor went to that of theerchants. There he remained about ten minutes. Pierre was among thoseho saw him come out from the merchants' hall with tears of emotion inis eyes. As became known later, he had scarcely begun to addresshe merchants before tears gushed from his eyes and he concluded in trembling voice. When Pierre saw the Emperor he was coming outccompanied by two merchants, one of whom Pierre knew, a fattkupshchik. The other was the mayor, a man with a thin sallow facend narrow beard. Both were weeping. Tears filled the thin man's eyes,nd the fat otkupshchik sobbed outright like a child and keptepeating:
	"Our lives and property- take them, Your Majesty!"
	Pierre's one feeling at the moment was a desire to show that heas ready to go all lengths and was prepared to sacrificeverything. He now felt ashamed of his speech with itsonstitutional tendency and sought an opportunity of effacing it.aving heard that Count Mamonov was furnishing a regiment, Bezukhov atnce informed Rostopchin that he would give a thousand men and theiraintenance.
	Old Rostov could not tell his wife of what had passed without tears,nd at once consented to Petya's request and went himself to enter hisame.
	Next day the Emperor left Moscow. The assembled nobles all tookff their uniforms and settled down again in their homes and clubs,nd not without some groans gave orders to their stewards about thenrollment, feeling amazed themselves at what they had done.BK10	                               BOOK TEN: 1812BK10|CH1
	CHAPTER I
	Napoleon began the war with Russia because he could not resist goingo Dresden, could not help having his head turned by the homage heeceived, could not help donning a Polish uniform and yielding tohe stimulating influence of a June morning, and could not refrainrom bursts of anger in the presence of Kurakin and then of Balashev.
	Alexander refused negotiations because he felt himself to beersonally insulted. Barclay de Tolly tried to command the army in theest way, because he wished to fulfill his duty and earn fame as areat commander. Rostov charged the French because he could notestrain his wish for a gallop across a level field; and in the sameay the innumerable people who took part in the war acted in accordith their personal characteristics, habits, circumstances, andims. They were moved by fear or vanity, rejoiced or were indignant,easoned, imagining that they knew what they were doing and did itf their own free will, but they all were involuntary tools ofistory, carrying on a work concealed from them but comprehensibleo us. Such is the inevitable fate of men of action, and the higherhey stand in the social hierarchy the less are they free.
	The actors of 1812 have long since left the stage, their personalnterests have vanished leaving no trace, and nothing remains ofhat time but its historic results.
	Providence compelled all these men, striving to attain personalims, to further the accomplishment of a stupendous result no one ofhem at all expected- neither Napoleon, nor Alexander, nor stilless any of those who did the actual fighting.
	The cause of the destruction of the French army in 1812 is clearo us now. No one will deny that that cause was, on the one hand,ts advance into the heart of Russia late in the season without anyreparation for a winter campaign and, on the other, the characteriven to the war by the burning of Russian towns and the hatred of theoe this aroused among the Russian people. But no one at the timeoresaw (what now seems so evident) that this was the only way an armyf eight hundred thousand men- the best in the world and led by theest general- could be destroyed in conflict with a raw army of halfts numerical strength, and led by inexperienced commanders as theussian army was. Not only did no one see this, but on the Russianide every effort was made to hinder the only thing that could saveussia, while on the French side, despite Napoleon's experience ando-called military genius, every effort was directed to pushing ono Moscow at the end of the summer, that is, to doing the very thinghat was bound to lead to destruction.
	In historical works on the year 1812 French writers are very fond ofaying that Napoleon felt the danger of extending his line, that heought a battle and that his marshals advised him to stop at Smolensk,nd of making similar statements to show that the danger of theampaign was even then understood. Russian authors are still fonder ofelling us that from the commencement of the campaign a Scythian warlan was adopted to lure Napoleon into the depths of Russia, andhis plan some of them attribute to Pfuel, others to a certainrenchman, others to Toll, and others again to Alexander himself-ointing to notes, projects, and letters which contain hints of such aine of action. But all these hints at what happened, both from therench side and the Russian, are advanced only because they fit inith the event. Had that event not occurred these hints would haveeen forgotten, as we have forgotten the thousands and millions ofints and expectations to the contrary which were current then butave now been forgotten because the event falsified them. There arelways so many conjectures as to the issue of any event that howevert may end there will always be people to say: "I said then that itould be so," quite forgetting that amid their innumerable conjecturesany were to quite the contrary effect.
	Conjectures as to Napoleon's awareness of the danger of extendingis line, and (on the Russian side) as to luring the enemy into theepths of Russia, are evidently of that kind, and only by muchtraining can historians attribute such conceptions to Napoleon andis marshals, or such plans to the Russian commanders. All the factsre in flat contradiction to such conjectures. During the whole periodf the war not only was there no wish on the Russian side to drawhe French into the heart of the country, but from their first entrynto Russia everything was done to stop them. And not only wasapoleon not afraid to extend his line, but he welcomed every steporward as a triumph and did not seek battle as eagerly as in formerampaigns, but very lazily.
	At the very beginning of the war our armies were divided, and ourole aim was to unite them, though uniting the armies was no advantagef we meant to retire and lure the enemy into the depths of theountry. Our Emperor joined the army to encourage it to defend everynch of Russian soil and not to retreat. The enormous Drissa campas formed on Pfuel's plan, and there was no intention of retiringarther. The Emperor reproached the commanders in chief for every stephey retired. He could not bear the idea of letting the enemy eveneach Smolensk, still less could he contemplate the burning of Moscow,nd when our armies did unite he was displeased that Smolensk wasbandoned and burned without a general engagement having been foughtnder its walls.
	So thought the Emperor, and the Russian commanders and people weretill more provoked at the thought that our forces were retreatingnto the depths of the country.
	Napoleon having cut our armies apart advanced far into the countrynd missed several chances of forcing an engagement. In August heas at Smolensk and thought only of how to advance farther, thoughs we now see that advance was evidently ruinous to him.
	The facts clearly show that Napoleon did not foresee the danger ofhe advance on Moscow, nor did Alexander and the Russian commandershen think of luring Napoleon on, but quite the contrary. The luringf Napoleon into the depths of the country was not the result of anylan, for no one believed it to be possible; it resulted from a mostomplex interplay of intrigues, aims, and wishes among those whoook part in the war and had no perception whatever of the inevitable,r of the one way of saving Russia. Everything came aboutortuitously. The armies were divided at the commencement of theampaign. We tried to unite them, with the evident intention of givingattle and checking the enemy's advance, and by this effort to unitehem while avoiding battle with a much stronger enemy, and necessarilyithdrawing the armies at an acute angle- we led the French on tomolensk. But we withdrew at an acute angle not only because therench advanced between our two armies; the angle became still morecute and we withdrew still farther, because Barclay de Tolly was annpopular foreigner disliked by Bagration (who would come hisommand), and Bagration- being in command of the second army- tried toostpone joining up and coming under Barclay's command as long as heould. Bagration was slow in effecting the junction- though that washe chief aim of all at headquarters- because, as he alleged, hexposed his army to danger on this march, and it was best for him toetire more to the left and more to the south, worrying the enemy fromlank and rear and securing from the Ukraine recruits for his army;nd it looks as if he planned this in order not to come under theommand of the detested foreigner Barclay, whose rank was inferioro his own.
	The Emperor was with the army to encourage it, but his presencend ignorance of what steps to take, and the enormous number ofdvisers and plans, destroyed the first army's energy and it retired.
	The intention was to make a stand at the Drissa camp, butaulucci, aiming at becoming commander in chief, unexpectedly employedis energy to influence Alexander, and Pfuel's whole plan wasbandoned and the command entrusted to Barclay. But as Barclay did notnspire confidence his power was limited. The armies were divided,here was no unity of command, and Barclay was unpopular; but fromhis confusion, division, and the unpopularity of the foreignommander in chief, there resulted on the one hand indecision andhe avoidance of a battle (which we could not have refrained fromad the armies been united and had someone else, instead of Barclay,een in command) and on the other an ever-increasing indignationgainst the foreigners and an increase in patriotic zeal.
	At last the Emperor left the army, and as the most convenient andndeed the only pretext for his departure it was decided that it wasecessary for him to inspire the people in the capitals and arouse theation in general to a patriotic war. And by this visit of the Emperoro Moscow the strength of the Russian army was trebled.
	He left in order not to obstruct the commander in chief'sndivided control of the army, and hoping that more decisive actionould then be taken, but the command of the armies became still moreonfused and enfeebled. Bennigsen, the Tsarevich, and a swarm ofdjutants general remained with the army to keep the commander inhief under observation and arouse his energy, and Barclay, feelingess free than ever under the observation of all these "eyes of themperor," became still more cautious of undertaking any decisivection and avoided giving battle.
	Barclay stood for caution. The Tsarevich hinted at treachery andemanded a general engagement. Lubomirski, Bronnitski, Wlocki, and thethers of that group stirred up so much trouble that Barclay, underretext of sending papers to the Emperor, dispatched these Polishdjutants general to Petersburg and plunged into an open struggle withennigsen and the Tsarevich.
	At Smolensk the armies at last reunited, much as Bagrationisliked it.
	Bagration drove up in a carriage to to the house occupied byarclay. Barclay donned his sash and came out to meet and report tois senior officer Bagration.
	Despite his seniority in rank Bagration, in this contest ofagnanimity, took his orders from Barclay, but, having submitted,greed with him less than ever. By the Emperor's orders Bagrationeported direct to him. He wrote to Arakcheev, the Emperor'sonfidant: "It must be as my sovereign pleases, but I cannot work withhe Minister (meaning Barclay). For God's sake send me somewherelse if only in command of a regiment. I cannot stand it here.eadquarters are so full of Germans that a Russian cannot exist andhere is no sense in anything. I thought I was really serving myovereign and the Fatherland, but it turns out that I am servingarclay. I confess I do not want to."
	The swarm of Bronnitskis and Wintzingerodes and their like stillurther embittered the relations between the commanders in chief,nd even less unity resulted. Preparations were made to fight therench before Smolensk. A general was sent to survey the position.his general, hating Barclay, rode to visit a friend of his own, aorps commander, and, having spent the day with him, returned toarclay and condemned, as unsuitable from every point of view, theattleground he had not seen.
	While disputes and intrigues were going on about the future field ofattle, and while we were looking for the French- having lost touchith them- the French stumbled upon Neverovski's division andeached the walls of Smolensk.
	It was necessary to fight an unexpected battle at Smolensk to saveur lines of communication. The battle was fought and thousands wereilled on both sides.
	Smolensk was abandoned contrary to the wishes of the Emperor andf the whole people. But Smolensk was burned by its ownnhabitants-who had been misled by their governor. And these ruinednhabitants, setting an example to other Russians, went to Moscowhinking only of their own losses but kindling hatred of the foe.apoleon advanced farther and we retired, thus arriving at the veryesult which caused his destruction.BK10|CH2
	CHAPTER II
	The day after his son had left, Prince Nicholas sent for Princessary to come to his study.
	"Well? Are you satisfied now?" said he. "You've made me quarrel withy son! Satisfied, are you? That's all you wanted! Satisfied?... Iturts me, it hurts. I'm old and weak and this is what you wanted. Wellhen, gloat over it! Gloat over it!"
	After that Princess Mary did not see her father for a whole week. Heas ill and did not leave his study.
	Princess Mary noticed to her surprise that during this illness theld prince not only excluded her from his room, but did not admitademoiselle Bourienne either. Tikhon alone attended him.
	At the end of the week the prince reappeared and resumed hisormer way of life, devoting himself with special activity to buildingperations and the arrangement of the gardens and completelyreaking off his relations with Mademoiselle Bourienne. His looksnd cold tone to his daughter seemed to say: "There, you see? Youlotted against me, you lied to Prince Andrew about my relationsith that Frenchwoman and made me quarrel with him, but you see I needeither her nor you!"
	Princess Mary spent half of every day with little Nicholas, watchingis lessons, teaching him Russian and music herself, and talking toessalles; the rest of the day she spent over her books, with herld nurse, or with "God's folk" who sometimes came by the back door toee her.
	Of the war Princess Mary thought as women do think about wars. Sheeared for her brother who was in it, was horrified by and amazed athe strange cruelty that impels men to kill one another, but she didot understand the significance of this war, which seemed to herike all previous wars. She did not realize the significance of thisar, though Dessalles with whom she constantly conversed wasassionately interested in its progress and tried to explain his ownonception of it to her, and though the "God's folk" who came to seeer reported, in their own way, the rumors current among the people ofn invasion by Antichrist, and though Julie (now Princessrubetskaya), who had resumed correspondence with her, wrote patrioticetters from Moscow.
	"I write you in Russian, my good friend," wrote Julie in herrenchified Russian, "because I have a detestation for all the French,nd the same for their language which I cannot support to hearpoken.... We in Moscow are elated by enthusiasm for our adoredmperor.
	"My poor husband is enduring pains and hunger in Jewish taverns, buthe news which I have inspires me yet more.
	"You heard probably of the heroic exploit of Raevski, embracingis two sons and saying: 'I will perish with them but we will not behaken!' And truly though the enemy was twice stronger than we, weere unshakable. We pass the time as we can, but in war as in war! Therincesses Aline and Sophie sit whole days with me, and we, unhappyidows of live men, make beautiful conversations over our charpie,nly you, my friend, are missing..." and so on.
	The chief reason Princess Mary did not realize the full significancef this war was that the old prince never spoke of it, did notecognize it, and laughed at Dessalles when he mentioned it at dinner.he prince's tone was so calm and confident that Princess Marynhesitatingly believed him.
	All that July the old prince was exceedingly active and evennimated. He planned another garden and began a new building for theomestic serfs. The only thing that made Princess Mary anxious aboutim was that he slept very little and, instead of sleeping in histudy as usual, changed his sleeping place every day. One day he wouldrder his camp bed to be set up in the glass gallery, another day heemained on the couch or on the lounge chair in the drawing room andozed there without undressing, while- instead of Mademoiselleourienne- a serf boy read to him. Then again he would spend a nightn the dining room.
	On August 1, a second letter was received from Prince Andrew. In hisirst letter which came soon after he had left home, Prince Andrew hadutifully asked his father's forgiveness for what he had allowedimself to say and begged to be restored to his favor. To thisetter the old prince had replied affectionately, and from that timead kept the Frenchwoman at at Prince Andrew's second letter,ritten near Vitebsk after the French had occupied that town, gave arief account of the whole campaign, enclosed for them a plan he hadrawn and forecasts as to the further progress of the war. In thisetter Prince Andrew pointed out to his father the danger of stayingt Bald Hills, so near the theater of war and on the army's directine of march, and advised him to move to Moscow.
	At dinner that day, on Dessalles' mentioning that the French wereaid to have already entered Vitebsk, the old prince remembered hison's letter.
	"There was a letter from Prince Andrew today," he said to Princessary- "Haven't you read it?"
	"No, Father," she replied in a frightened voice.
	She could not have read the letter as she did not even know it hadrrived.
	"He writes about this war," said the prince, with the ironic smilehat had become habitual to him in speaking of the present war.
	"That must be very interesting," said Dessalles. "Prince Andrew isn a position to know..."
	"Oh, very interesting!" said Mademoiselle Bourienne.
	"Go and get it for me," said the old prince to Mademoiselleourienne. "You know- under the paperweight on the little table."
	Mademoiselle Bourienne jumped up eagerly.
	"No, don't!" he exclaimed with a frown. "You go, Michael Ivanovich."
	Michael Ivanovich rose and went to the study. But as soon as head left the room the old prince, looking uneasily round, threw downis napkin and went himself.
	"They can't do anything... always make some muddle," he muttered.
	While he was away Princess Mary, Dessalles, Mademoiselleourienne, and even little Nicholas exchanged looks in silence. Theld prince returned with quick steps, accompanied by Michaelvanovich, bringing the letter and a plan. These he put down besideim- not letting anyone read them at dinner.
	On moving to the drawing room he handed the letter to Princessary and, spreading out before him the plan of the new building andixing his eyes upon it, told her to read the letter aloud. When shead done so Princess Mary looked inquiringly at her father. He wasxamining the plan, evidently engrossed in his own ideas.
	"What do you think of it, Prince?" Dessalles ventured to ask.
	"I? I?..." said the prince as if unpleasantly awakened, and notaking his eyes from the plan of the building.
	"Very possibly the theater of war will move so near to us that..."
	"Ha ha ha! The theater of war!" said the prince. "I have said andtill say that the theater of war is Poland and the enemy will neveret beyond the Niemen."
	Dessalles looked in amazement at the prince, who was talking ofhe Niemen when the enemy was already at the Dnieper, but Princessary, forgetting the geographical position of the Niemen, thought thathat her father was saying was correct.
	"When the snow melts they'll sink in the Polish swamps. Only theyould fail to see it," the prince continued, evidently thinking of theampaign of 1807 which seemed to him so recent. "Bennigsen should havedvanced into Prussia sooner, then things would have taken a differenturn..."
	"But, Prince," Dessalles began timidly, "the letter mentionsitebsk...."
	"Ah, the letter? Yes..." replied the prince peevishly. "Yes...es..." His face suddenly took on a morose expression. He paused.Yes, he writes that the French were beaten at... at... what rivers it?"
	Dessalles dropped his eyes.
	"The prince says nothing about that," he remarked gently.
	"Doesn't he? But I didn't invent it myself."
	No one spoke for a long time.
	"Yes... yes... Well, Michael Ivanovich," he suddenly went on,aising his head and pointing to the plan of the building, "tell meow you mean to alter it...."
	Michael Ivanovich went up to the plan, and the prince after speakingo him about the building looked angrily at Princess Mary andessalles and went to his own room.
	Princess Mary saw Dessalles' embarrassed and astonished look fixedn her father, noticed his silence, and was struck by the fact thater father had forgotten his son's letter on the drawing-room table;ut she was not only afraid to speak of it and ask Dessalles theeason of his confusion and silence, but was afraid even to thinkbout it.
	In the evening Michael Ivanovich, sent by the prince, came torincess Mary for Prince Andrew's letter which had been forgotten inhe drawing room. She gave it to him and, unpleasant as it was toer to do so, ventured to ask him what her father was doing.
	"Always busy," replied Michael Ivanovich with a respectfullyronic smile which caused Princess Mary to turn pale. "He's worryingery much about the new building. He has been reading a little, butow"- Michael Ivanovich went on, lowering his voice- "now he's atis desk, busy with his will, I expect." (One of the prince's favoriteccupations of late had been the preparation of some papers he meanto leave at his death and which he called his "will.")
	"And Alpatych is being sent to Smolensk?" asked Princess Mary.
	"Oh, yes, he has been waiting to start for some time."BK10|CH3
	CHAPTER III
	When Michael Ivanovich returned to the study with the letter, theld prince, with spectacles on and a shade over his eyes, wasitting at his open bureau with screened candles, holding a paper inis outstretched hand, and in a somewhat dramatic attitude was readingis manuscript- his "Remarks" as he termed it- which was to beransmitted to the Emperor after his death.
	When Michael Ivanovich went in there were tears in the prince's eyesvoked by the memory of the time when the paper he was now reading hadeen written. He took the letter from Michael Ivanovich's hand, put itn his pocket, folded up his papers, and called in Alpatych who hadong been waiting.
	The prince had a list of things to be bought in Smolensk and,alking up and down the room past Alpatych who stood by the door, heave his instructions.
	"First, notepaper- do you hear? Eight quires, like this sample,ilt-edged... it must be exactly like the sample. Varnish, sealingax, as in Michael Ivanovich's list."
	He paced up and down for a while and glanced at his notes.
	"Then hand to the governor in person a letter about the deed."
	Next, bolts for the doors of the new building were wanted and had toe of a special shape the prince had himself designed, and a leatherase had to be ordered to keep the "will" in.
	The instructions to Alpatych took over two hours and still therince did not let him go. He sat down, sank into thought, closedis eyes, and dozed off. Alpatych made a slight movement.
	"Well, go, go! If anything more is wanted I'll send after you."
	Alpatych went out. The prince again went to his bureau, glanced intot, fingered his papers, closed the bureau again, and sat down athe table to write to the governor.
	It was already late when he rose after sealing the letter. He wishedo sleep, but he knew he would not be able to and that most depressinghoughts came to him in bed. So he called Tikhon and went throughhe rooms with him to show him where to set up the bed for that night.
	He went about looking at every corner. Every place seemednsatisfactory, but worst of all was his customary couch in the study.hat couch was dreadful to him, probably because of the oppressivehoughts he had had when lying there. It was unsatisfactoryverywhere, but the corner behind the piano in the sitting room wasetter than other places: he had never slept there yet.
	With the help of a footman Tikhon brought in the bedstead andegan putting it up.
	"That's not right! That's not right!" cried the prince, andimself pushed it a few inches from the corner and then closer ingain.
	"Well, at last I've finished, now I'll rest," thought the prince,nd let Tikhon undress him.
	Frowning with vexation at the effort necessary to divest himselff his coat and trousers, the prince undressed, sat down heavily onhe bed, and appeared to be meditating as he looked contemptuouslyt his withered yellow legs. He was not meditating, but only deferringhe moment of making the effort to lift those legs up and turn over onhe bed. "Ugh, how hard it is! Oh, that this toil might end and youould release me!" thought he. Pressing his lips together he made thatffort for the twenty-thousandth time and lay down. But hardly hade done so before he felt the bed rocking backwards and forwardseneath him as if it were breathing heavily and jolting. This happenedo him almost every night. He opened his eyes as they were closing.
	"No peace, damn them!" he muttered, angry he knew not with whom. "Ahes, there was something else important, very important, that I waseeping till I should be in bed. The bolts? No, I told him about them.o, it was something, something in the drawing room. Princess Maryalked some nonsense. Dessalles, that fool, said something.omething in my pocket- can't remember..."
	"Tikhon, what did we talk about at dinner?"
	"About Prince Michael..."
	"Be quiet, quiet!" The prince slapped his hand on the table. "Yes, Inow, Prince Andrew's letter! Princess Mary read it. Dessalles saidomething about Vitebsk. Now I'll read it."
	He had the letter taken from his pocket and the table- on whichtood a glass of lemonade and a spiral wax candle- moved close tohe bed, and putting on his spectacles he began reading. Only now inhe stillness of the night, reading it by the faint light under thereen shade, did he grasp its meaning for a moment.
	"The French at Vitebsk, in four days' march they may be at Smolensk;erhaps are already there! Tikhon!" Tikhon jumped up. "No, no, I don'tant anything!" he shouted.
	He put the letter under the candlestick and closed his eyes. Andhere rose before him the Danube at bright noonday: reeds, the Russianamp, and himself a young general without a wrinkle on his ruddy face,igorous and alert, entering Potemkin's gaily colored tent, and aurning sense of jealousy of "the favorite" agitated him now astrongly as it had done then. He recalled all the words spoken at thatirst meeting with Potemkin. And he saw before him a plump, ratherallow-faced, short, stout woman, the Empress Mother, with her smilend her words at her first gracious reception of him, and then thatame face on the catafalque, and the encounter he had with Zubovver her coffin about his right to kiss her hand.
	"Oh, quicker, quicker! To get back to that time and have done withll the present! Quicker, quicker- and that they should leave me ineace!"BK10|CH4
	CHAPTER IV
	Bald Hills, Prince Nicholas Bolkonski's estate, lay forty miles eastrom Smolensk and two miles from the main road to Moscow.
	The same evening that the prince gave his instructions tolpatych, Dessalles, having asked to see Princess Mary, told her that,s the prince was not very well and was taking no steps to secureis safety, though from Prince Andrew's letter it was evident thato remain at Bald Hills might be dangerous, he respectfully adviseder to send a letter by Alpatych to the Provincial Governor atmolensk, asking him to let her know the state of affairs and thextent of the danger to which Bald Hills was exposed. Dessallesrote this letter to the Governor for Princess Mary, she signed it,nd it was given to Alpatych with instructions to hand it to theovernor and to come back as quickly as possible if there was danger.
	Having received all his orders Alpatych, wearing a white beaver hat- present from the prince- and carrying a stick as the prince did,ent out accompanied by his family. Three well-fed roans stood readyarnessed to a small conveyance with a leather hood.
	The larger bell was muffled and the little bells on the harnesstuffed with paper. The prince allowed no one at Bald Hills to driveith ringing bells; but on a long journey Alpatych liked to have them.is satellites- the senior clerk, a countinghouse clerk, a sculleryaid, a cook, two old women, a little pageboy, the coachman, andarious domestic serfs- were seeing him off.
	His daughter placed chintz-covered down cushions for him to sit onnd behind his back. His old sister-in-law popped in a small bundle,nd one of the coachmen helped him into the vehicle.
	"There! There! Women's fuss! Women, women!" said Alpatych, puffingnd speaking rapidly just as the prince did, and he climbed into therap.
	After giving the clerk orders about the work to be done, Alpatych,ot trying to imitate the prince now, lifted the hat from his baldead and crossed himself three times.
	"If there is anything... come back, Yakov Alpatych! For Christ'sake think of us!" cried his wife, referring to the rumors of warnd the enemy.
	"Women, women! Women's fuss!" muttered Alpatych to himself andtarted on his journey, looking round at the fields of yellow ryend the still-green, thickly growing oats, and at other quite blackields just being plowed a second time.
	As he went along he looked with pleasure at the year's splendid cropf corn, scrutinized the strips of ryefield which here and thereere already being reaped, made his calculations as to the sowingnd the harvest, and asked himself whether he had not forgotten any ofhe prince's orders.
	Having baited the horses twice on the way, he arrived at the townoward evening on the fourth of August.
	Alpatych kept meeting and overtaking baggage trains and troops onhe road. As he approached Smolensk he heard the sounds of distantiring, but these did not impress him. What struck him most was theight of a splendid field of oats in which a camp had been pitched andhich was being mown down by the soldiers, evidently for fodder.his fact impressed Alpatych, but in thinking about his own businesse soon forgot it.
	All the interests of his life for more than thirty years had beenounded by the will of the prince, and he never went beyond thatimit. Everything not connected with the execution of the prince'srders did not interest and did not even exist for Alpatych.
	On reaching Smolensk on the evening of the fourth of August he putp in the Gachina suburb across the Dnieper, at the inn kept byerapontov, where he had been in the habit of putting up for theast thirty years. Some thirty years ago Ferapontov, by Alpatych'sdvice, had bought a wood from the prince, had begun to trade, and nowad a house, an inn, and a corn dealer's shop in that province. He was stout, dark, red-faced peasant in the forties, with thick lips, aroad knob of a nose, similar knobs over his black frowning brows, and round belly.
	Wearing a waistcoat over his cotton shirt, Ferapontov was standingefore his shop which opened onto the street. On seeing Alpatych heent up to him.
	"You're welcome, Yakov Alpatych. Folks are leaving the town, but youave come to it," said he.
	"Why are they leaving the town?" asked Alpatych.
	"That's what I say. Folks are foolish! Always afraid of the French."
	"Women's fuss, women's fuss!" said Alpatych.
	"Just what I think, Yakov Alpatych. What I say is: orders haveeen given not to let them in, so that must be right. And the peasantsre asking three rubles for carting- it isn't Christian!"
	Yakov Alpatych heard without heeding. He asked for a samovar and foray for his horses, and when he had had his tea he went to bed.
	All night long troops were moving past the inn. Next morninglpatych donned a jacket he wore only in town and went out onusiness. It was a sunny morning and by eight o'clock it was alreadyot. "A good day for harvesting," thought Alpatych.
	From beyond the town firing had been heard since early morning. Atight o'clock the booming of cannon was added to the sound ofusketry. Many people were hurrying through the streets and there wereany soldiers, but cabs were still driving about, tradesmen stood atheir shops, and service was being held in the churches as usual.lpatych went to the shops, to government offices, to the post office,nd to the Governor's. In the offices and shops and at the post officeveryone was talking about the army and about the enemy who waslready attacking the town, everybody was asking what should beone, and all were trying to calm one another.
	In front of the Governor's house Alpatych found a large number ofeople, Cossacks, and a traveling carriage of the Governor's. At theorch he met two of the landed gentry, one of whom he knew. Thisan, an ex-captain of police, was saying angrily:
	"It's no joke, you know! It's all very well if you're single. 'Onean though undone is but one,' as the proverb says, but withhirteen in your family and all the property... They've brought uso utter ruin! What sort of governors are they to do that? Theyught to be hanged- the brigands!..."
	"Oh come, that's enough!" said the other.
	"What do I care? Let him hear! We're not dogs," said thex-captain of police, and looking round he noticed Alpatych.
	"Oh, Yakov Alpatych! What have you come for?"
	"To see the Governor by his excellency's order," answeredlpatych, lifting his head and proudly thrusting his hand into theosom of his coat as he always did when he mentioned the prince.... Heas ordered me to inquire into the position of affairs," he added.
	"Yes, go and find out!" shouted the angry gentleman. "They'verought things to such a pass that there are no carts ornything!... There it is again, do you hear?" said he, pointing in theirection whence came the sounds of firing.
	"They've brought us all to ruin... the brigands!" he repeated, andescended the porch steps.
	Alpatych swayed his head and went upstairs. In the waiting room wereradesmen, women, and officials, looking silently at one another.he door of the Governor's room opened and they all rose and movedorward. An official ran out, said some words to a merchant, called stout official with a cross hanging on his neck to follow him, andanished again, evidently wishing to avoid the inquiring looks anduestions addressed to him. Alpatych moved forward and next time thefficial came out addressed him, one hand placed in the breast ofis buttoned coat, and handed him two letters.
	"To his Honor Baron Asch, from General-in-Chief Prince Bolkonski,"e announced with such solemnity and significance that the officialurned to him and took the letters.
	A few minutes later the Governor received Alpatych and hurriedlyaid to him:
	"Inform the prince and princess that I knew nothing: I acted onhe highest instructions- here..." and he handed a paper tolpatych. "Still, as the prince is unwell my advice is that theyhould go to Moscow. I am just starting myself. Inform them..."
	But the Governor did not finish: a dusty perspiring officer ran intohe room and began to say something in French. The Governor's facexpressed terror.
	"Go," he said, nodding his head to Alpatych, and began questioninghe officer.
	Eager, frightened, helpless glances were turned on Alpatych whene came out of the Governor's room. Involuntarily listening now to theiring, which had drawn nearer and was increasing in strength,lpatych hurried to his inn. The paper handed to him by the Governoraid this:
	"I assure you that the town of Smolensk is not in the slightestanger as yet and it is unlikely that it will be threatened withny. I from the one side and Prince Bagration from the other arearching to unite our forces before Smolensk, which junction will beffected on the 22nd instant, and both armies with their united forcesill defend our compatriots of the province entrusted to your careill our efforts shall have beaten back the enemies of our Fatherland,r till the last warrior in our valiant ranks has perished. Fromhis you will see that you have a perfect right to reassure thenhabitants of Smolensk, for those defended by two such brave armiesay feel assured of victory." (Instructions from Barclay de Tolly toaron Asch, the civil governor of Smolensk, 1812.)
	People were anxiously roaming about the streets.
	Carts piled high with household utensils, chairs, and cupboards keptmerging from the gates of the yards and moving along the streets.oaded carts stood at the house next to Ferapontov's and women wereailing and lamenting as they said good-by. A small watchdog ran roundarking in front of the harnessed horses.
	Alpatych entered the innyard at a quicker pace than usual and wenttraight to the shed where his horses and trap were. The coachmanas asleep. He woke him up, told him to harness, and went into theassage. From the host's room came the sounds of a child crying, theespairing sobs of a woman, and the hoarse angry shouting oferapontov. The cook began running hither and thither in the passageike a frightened hen, just as Alpatych entered.
	"He's done her to death. Killed the mistress!... Beat her... draggeder about so!..."
	"What for?" asked Alpatych.
	"She kept begging to go away. She's a woman! 'Take me away,' sayshe, 'don't let me perish with my little children! Folks,' she says,are all gone, so why,' she says, 'don't we go?' And he beganeating and pulling her about so!"
	At these words Alpatych nodded as if in approval, and not wishing toear more went to the door of the room opposite the innkeeper's, wheree had left his purchases.
	"You brute, you murderer!" screamed a thin, pale woman who, with aaby in her arms and her kerchief torn from her head, burst throughhe door at that moment and down the steps into the yard.
	Ferapontov came out after her, but on seeing Alpatych adjusted hisaistcoat, smoothed his hair, yawned, and followed Alpatych into thepposite room.
	"Going already?" said he.
	Alpatych, without answering or looking at his host, sorted hisackages and asked how much he owed.
	"We'll reckon up! Well, have you been to the Governor's?" askederapontov. "What has been decided?"
	Alpatych replied that the Governor had not told him anythingefinite.
	"With our business, how can we get away?" said Ferapontov. "We'dave to pay seven rubles a cartload to Dorogobuzh and I tell themhey're not Christians to ask it! Selivanov, now, did a good strokeast Thursday- sold flour to the army at nine rubles a sack. Willou have some tea?" he added.
	While the horses were being harnessed Alpatych and Ferapontov overheir tea talked of the price of corn, the crops, and the good weatheror harvesting.
	"Well, it seems to be getting quieter," remarked Ferapontov,inishing his third cup of tea and getting up. "Ours must have got theest of it. The orders were not to let them in. So we're in force,t seems.... They say the other day Matthew Ivanych Platov drovehem into the river Marina and drowned some eighteen thousand in oneay."
	Alpatych collected his parcels, handed them to the coachman whoad come in, and settled up with the innkeeper. The noise of wheels,oofs, and bells was heard from the gateway as a little trap passedut.
	It was by now late in the afternoon. Half the street was inhadow, the other half brightly lit by the sun. Alpatych looked out ofhe window and went to the door. Suddenly the strange sound of aar-off whistling and thud was heard, followed by a boom of cannonlending into a dull roar that set the windows rattling.
	He went out into the street: two men were running past toward theridge. From different sides came whistling sounds and the thud ofannon balls and bursting shells falling on the town. But these soundsere hardly heard in comparison with the noise of the firing outsidehe town and attracted little attention from the inhabitants. The townas being bombarded by a hundred and thirty guns which Napoleon hadrdered up after four o'clock. The people did not at once realizehe meaning of this bombardment.
	At first the noise of the falling bombs and shells only arouseduriosity. Ferapontov's wife, who till then had not ceased wailingnder the shed, became quiet and with the baby in her arms went to theate, listening to the sounds and looking in silence at the people.
	The cook and a shop assistant came to the gate. With livelyuriosity everyone tried to get a glimpse of the projectiles as theylew over their heads. Several people came round the corner talkingagerly.
	"What force!" remarked one. "Knocked the roof and ceiling all toplinters!"
	"Routed up the earth like a pig," said another.
	"That's grand, it bucks one up!" laughed the first. "Lucky youumped aside, or it would have wiped you out!"
	Others joined those men and stopped and told how cannon balls hadallen on a house close to them. Meanwhile still more projectiles, nowith the swift sinister whistle of a cannon ball, now with thegreeable intermittent whistle of a shell, flew over people's headsncessantly, but not one fell close by, they all flew over. Alpatychas getting into his trap. The innkeeper stood at the gate.
	"What are you staring at?" he shouted to the cook, who in her redkirt, with sleeves rolled up, swinging her bare elbows, had steppedo the corner to listen to what was being said.
	"What marvels!" she exclaimed, but hearing her master's voice sheurned back. pulling down her tucked-up skirt.
	Once more something whistled, but this time quite close, swoopingownwards like a little bird; a flame flashed in the middle of thetreet, something exploded, and the street was shrouded in smoke.
	"Scoundrel, what are you doing?" shouted the innkeeper, rushing tohe cook.
	At that moment the pitiful wailing of women was heard from differentides, the frightened baby began to cry, and people crowded silentlyith pale faces round the cook. The loudest sound in that crowd waser wailing.
	"Oh-h-h! Dear souls, dear kind souls! Don't let me die! My goodouls!..."
	Five minutes later no one remained in the street. The cook, with herhigh broken by a shell splinter, had been carried into the kitchen.lpatych, his coachman, Ferapontov's wife and children and the houseorter were all sitting in the cellar, listening. The roar of guns,he whistling of projectiles, and the piteous moaning of the cook,hich rose above the other sounds, did not cease for a moment. Theistress rocked and hushed her baby and when anyone came into theellar asked in a pathetic whisper what had become of her husbandho had remained in the street. A shopman who entered told her thater husband had gone with others to the cathedral, whence they wereetching the wonder-working icon of Smolensk.
	Toward dusk the cannonade began to subside. Alpatych left the cellarnd stopped in the doorway. The evening sky that had been so clear waslouded with smoke, through which, high up, the sickle of the new moonhone strangely. Now that the terrible din of the guns had ceased aush seemed to reign over the town, broken only by the rustle ofootsteps, the moaning, the distant cries, and the crackle of fireshich seemed widespread everywhere. The cook's moans had now subsided.n two sides black curling clouds of smoke rose and spread from theires. Through the streets soldiers in various uniforms walked oran confusedly in different directions like ants from a ruinednt-hill. Several of them ran into Ferapontov's yard before Alpatych'syes. Alpatych went out to the gate. A retreating regiment,hronging and hurrying, blocked the street.
	Noticing him, an officer said: "The town is being abandoned. Getway, get away!" and then, turning to the soldiers, shouted:
	"I'll teach you to run into the yards!"
	Alpatych went back to the house, called the coachman, and told himo set off. Ferapontov's whole household came out too, followinglpatych and the coachman. The women, who had been silent till then,uddenly began to wail as they looked at the fires- the smoke and evenhe flames of which could be seen in the failing twilight- and as ifn reply the same kind of lamentation was heard from other parts ofhe street. Inside the shed Alpatych and the coachman arranged theangled reins and traces of their horses with trembling hands.
	As Alpatych was driving out of the gate he saw some ten soldiersn Ferapontov's open shop, talking loudly and filling their bags andnapsacks with flour and sunflower seeds. Just then Ferapontoveturned and entered his shop. On seeing the soldiers he was abouto shout at them, but suddenly stopped and, clutching at his hair,urst into sobs and laughter:
	"Loot everything, lads! Don't let those devils get it!" he cried,aking some bags of flour himself and throwing them into the street.
	Some of the soldiers were frightened and ran away, others went onilling their bags. On seeing Alpatych, Ferapontov turned to him:
	"Russia is done for!" he cried. "Alpatych, I'll set the place onire myself. We're done for!..." and Ferapontov ran into the yard.
	Soldiers were passing in a constant stream along the street blockingt completely, so that Alpatych could not pass out and had to wait.erapontov's wife and children were also sitting in a cart waitingill it was it was possible to drive out.
	Night had come. There were stars in the sky and the new moon shoneut amid the smoke that screened it. On the sloping descent to thenieper Alpatych's cart and that of the innkeeper's wife, which werelowly moving amid the rows of soldiers and of other vehicles, hado stop. In a side street near the crossroads where the vehicles hadtopped, a house and some shops were on fire. This fire was alreadyurning itself out. The flames now died down and were lost in thelack smoke, now suddenly flared up again brightly, lighting up withtrange distinctness the faces of the people crowding at therossroads. Black figures flitted about before the fire, and throughhe incessant crackling of the flames talking and shouting could beeard. Seeing that his trap would not be able to move on for someime, Alpatych got down and turned into the side street to look at theire. Soldiers were continually rushing backwards and forwards neart, and he saw two of them and a man in a frieze coat dragging burningeams into another yard across the street, while others carriedundles of hay.
	Alpatych went up to a large crowd standing before a high barnhich was blazing briskly. The walls were all on fire and the backall had fallen in, the wooden roof was collapsing, and the raftersere alight. The crowd was evidently watching for the roof to fall in,nd Alpatych watched for it too.
	"Alpatych!" a familiar voice suddenly hailed the old man.
	"Mercy on us! Your excellency!" answered Alpatych, immediatelyecognizing the voice of his young prince.
	Prince Andrew in his riding cloak, mounted on a black horse, wasooking at Alpatych from the back of the crowd.
	"Why are you here?" he asked.
	"Your... your excellency," stammered Alpatych and broke into sobs.Are we really lost? Master!..."
	"Why are you here?" Prince Andrew repeated.
	At that moment the flames flared up and showed his young master'sale worn face. Alpatych told how he had been sent there and howifficult it was to get away.
	"Are we really quite lost, your excellency?" he asked again.
	Prince Andrew without replying took out a notebook and raising hisnee began writing in pencil on a page he tore out. He wrote to hisister:
	"Smolensk is being abandoned. Bald Hills will be occupied by thenemy within a week. Set off immediately for Moscow. Let me know atnce when you will start. Send by special messenger to Usvyazh."
	Having written this and given the paper to Alpatych, he told him howo arrange for departure of the prince, the princess, his son, and theoy's tutor, and how and where to let him know immediately. Beforee had had time to finish giving these instructions, a chief oftaff followed by a suite galloped up to him.
	"You are a colonel?" shouted the chief of staff with a Germanccent, in a voice familiar to Prince Andrew. "Houses are set onire in your presence and you stand by! What does this mean? Youill answer for it!" shouted Berg, who was now assistant to thehief of staff of the commander of the left flank of the infantry ofhe first army, a place, as Berg said, "very agreeable and well envidence."
	Prince Andrew looked at him and without replying went on speaking tolpatych.
	"So tell them that I shall await a reply till the tenth, and if byhe tenth I don't receive news that they have all got away I shallave to throw up everything and come myself to Bald Hills."
	"Prince," said Berg, recognizing Prince Andrew, "I only spokeecause I have to obey orders, because I always do obey exactly....ou must please excuse me," he went on apologetically.
	Something cracked in the flames. The fire died down for a moment andreaths of black smoke rolled from under the roof. There was anothererrible crash and something huge collapsed.
	"Ou-rou-rou!" yelled the crowd, echoing the crash of theollapsing roof of the barn, the burning grain in which diffused aakelike aroma all around. The flames flared up again, lighting thenimated, delighted, exhausted faces of the spectators.
	The man in the frieze coat raised his arms and shouted:
	"It's fine, lads! Now it's raging... It's fine!"
	"That's the owner himself," cried several voices.
	"Well then," continued Prince Andrew to Alpatych, "report to them as have told you"; and not replying a word to Berg who was now muteeside him, he touched his horse and rode down the side street.BK10|CH5
	CHAPTER V
	From Smolensk the troops continued to retreat, followed by thenemy. On the tenth of August the regiment Prince Andrew commanded wasarching along the highroad past the avenue leading to Bald Hills.eat and drought had continued for more than three weeks. Each dayleecy clouds floated across the sky and occasionally veiled theun, but toward evening the sky cleared again and the sun set ineddish-brown mist. Heavy night dews alone refreshed the earth. Thenreaped corn was scorched and shed its grain. The marshes dried up.he cattle lowed from hunger, finding no food on the sun-parchedeadows. Only at night and in the forests while the dew lasted washere any freshness. But on the road, the highroad along which theroops marched, there was no such freshness even at night or whenhe road passed through the forest; the dew was imperceptible on theandy dust churned up more than six inches deep. As soon as day dawnedhe march began. The artillery and baggage wagons moved noiselesslyhrough the deep dust that rose to the very hubs of the wheels, andhe infantry sank ankle-deep in that soft, choking, hot dust thatever cooled even at night. Some of this dust was kneaded by theeet and wheels, while the rest rose and hung like a cloud over theroops, settling in eyes, ears, hair, and nostrils, and worst of alln the lungs of the men and beasts as they moved along that road.he higher the sun rose the higher rose that cloud of dust, andhrough the screen of its hot fine particles one could look with nakedye at the sun, which showed like a huge crimson ball in the uncloudedky. There was no wind, and the men choked in that motionlesstmosphere. They marched with handkerchiefs tied over their nosesnd mouths. When they passed through a village they all rushed tohe wells and fought for the water and drank it down to the mud.
	Prince Andrew was in command of a regiment, and the management ofhat regiment, the welfare of the men and the necessity of receivingnd giving orders, engrossed him. The burning of Smolensk and itsbandonment made an epoch in his life. A novel feeling of angergainst the foe made him forget his own sorrow. He was entirelyevoted to the affairs of his regiment and was considerate and kind tois men and officers. In the regiment they called him "our prince,"ere proud of him and loved him. But he was kind and gentle only tohose of his regiment, to Timokhin and the like- people quite new toim, belonging to a different world and who could not know andnderstand his past. As soon as he came across a former acquaintancer anyone from the staff, he bristled up immediately and grewpiteful, ironical, and contemptuous. Everything that reminded himf his past was repugnant to him, and so in his relations with thatormer circle he confined himself to trying to do his duty and noto be unfair.
	In truth everything presented itself in a dark and gloomy light torince Andrew, especially after the abandonment of Smolensk on theixth of August (he considered that it could and should have beenefended) and after his sick father had had to flee to Moscow,bandoning to pillage his dearly beloved Bald Hills which he had builtnd peopled. But despite this, thanks to his regiment, Prince Andrewad something to think about entirely apart from general questions.wo days previously he had received news that his father, son, andister had left for Moscow; and though there was nothing for him to dot Bald Hills, Prince Andrew with a characteristic desire to fomentis own grief decided that he must ride there.
	He ordered his horse to be saddled and, leaving his regiment onhe march, rode to his father's estate where he had been born andpent his childhood. Riding past the pond where there used always toe dozens of women chattering as they rinsed their linen or beat itith wooden beetles, Prince Andrew noticed that there was not a soulbout and that the little washing wharf, torn from its place andalf submerged, was floating on its side in the middle of the pond. Heode to the keeper's lodge. No one at the stone entrance gates ofhe drive and the door stood open. Grass had already begun to grown the garden paths, and horses and calves were straying in thenglish park. Prince Andrew rode up to the hothouse; some of the glassanes were broken, and of the trees in tubs some were overturned andthers dried up. He called for Taras the gardener, but no one replied.aving gone round the corner of the hothouse to the ornamental garden,e saw that the carved garden fence was broken and branches of thelum trees had been torn off with the fruit. An old peasant whomrince Andrew in his childhood had often seen at the gate wasitting on a green garden seat, plaiting a bast shoe.
	He was deaf and did not hear Prince Andrew ride up. He was sittingn the seat the old prince used to like to sit on, and beside himtrips of bast were hanging on the broken and withered branch of aagnolia.
	Prince Andrew rode up to the house. Several limes in the oldarden had been cut down and a piebald mare and her foal wereandering in front of the house among the rosebushes. The shuttersere all closed, except at one window which was open. A little serfoy, seeing Prince Andrew, ran into the house. Alpatych, having sentis family away, was alone at Bald Hills and was sitting indoorseading the Lives of the Saints. On hearing that Prince Andrew hadome, he went out with his spectacles on his nose, buttoning his coat,nd, hastily stepping up, without a word began weeping and kissingrince Andrew's knee.
	Then, vexed at his own weakness, he turned away and began toeport on the position of affairs. Everything precious and valuablead been removed to Bogucharovo. Seventy quarters of grain had alsoeen carted away. The hay and the spring corn, of which Alpatychaid there had been a remarkable crop that year, had been commandeeredy the troops and mown down while still green. The peasants wereuined; some of them too had gone to Bogucharovo, only a few remained.
	Without waiting to hear him out, Prince Andrew asked:
	"When did my father and sister leave?" meaning when did they leaveor Moscow.
	Alpatych, understanding the question to refer to their departure forogucharovo, replied that they had left on the seventh and againent into details concerning the estate management, asking fornstructions.
	"Am I to let the troops have the oats, and to take a receipt forhem? We have still six hundred quarters left," he inquired.
	"What am I to say to him?" thought Prince Andrew, looking down onhe old man's bald head shining in the sun and seeing by thexpression on his face that the old man himself understood howntimely such questions were and only asked them to allay his grief.
	"Yes, let them have it," replied Prince Andrew.
	"If you noticed some disorder in the garden," said Alpatych, "it wasmpossible to prevent it. Three regiments have been here and spent theight, dragoons mostly. I took down the name and rank of theirommanding officer, to hand in a complaint about it."
	"Well, and what are you going to do? Will you stay here if the enemyccupies the place?" asked Prince Andrew.
	Alpatych turned his face to Prince Andrew, looked at him, anduddenly with a solemn gesture raised his arm.
	"He is my refuge! His will be done!" he exclaimed.
	A group of bareheaded peasants was approaching across the meadowoward the prince.
	"Well, good-by!" said Prince Andrew, bending over to Alpatych.You must go away too, take away what you can and tell the serfs to goo the Ryazan estate or to the one near Moscow."
	Alpatych clung to Prince Andrew's leg and burst into sobs. Gentlyisengaging himself, the prince spurred his horse and rode down thevenue at a gallop.
	The old man was still sitting in the ornamental garden, like a flympassive on the face of a loved one who is dead, tapping the lastn which he was making the bast shoe, and two little girls, runningut from the hot house carrying in their skirts plums they had pluckedrom the trees there, came upon Prince Andrew. On seeing the youngaster, the elder one frightened look clutched her younger companiony the hand and hid with her behind a birch tree, not stopping to pickp some green plums they had dropped.
	Prince Andrew turned away with startled haste, unwilling to let themee that they had been observed. He was sorry for the prettyrightened little girl, was afraid of looking at her, and yet feltn irresistible desire to do so. A new sensation of comfort and reliefame over him when, seeing these girls, he realized the existence ofther human interests entirely aloof from his own and just asegitimate as those that occupied him. Evidently these girlsassionately desired one thing- to carry away and eat those greenlums without being caught- and Prince Andrew shared their wish forhe success of their enterprise. He could not resist looking at themnce more. Believing their danger past, they sprang from theirmbush and, chirruping something in their shrill little voices andolding up their skirts, their bare little sunburned feet scamperederrily and quickly across the meadow grass.
	Prince Andrew was somewhat refreshed by having ridden off theusty highroad along which the troops were moving. But not far fromald Hills he again came out on the road and overtook his regimentt its halting place by the dam of a small pond. It was past one'clock. The sun, a red ball through the dust, burned and scorched hisack intolerably through his black coat. The dust always hungotionless above the buzz of talk that came from the resting troops.here was no wind. As he crossed the dam Prince Andrew smelled theoze and freshness of the pond. He longed to get into that water,owever dirty it might be, and he glanced round at the pool fromhence came sounds of shrieks and laughter. The small, muddy, greenond had risen visibly more than a foot, flooding the dam, becauset was full of the naked white bodies of soldiers with brick-redands, necks, and faces, who were splashing about in it. All thisaked white human flesh, laughing and shrieking, floundered about inhat dirty pool like carp stuffed into a watering can, and theuggestion of merriment in that floundering mass rendered it speciallyathetic.
	One fair-haired young soldier of the third company, whom Princendrew knew and who had a strap round the calf of one leg, crossedimself, stepped back to get a good run, and plunged into the water;nother, a dark noncommissioned officer who was always shaggy, stoodp to his waist in the water joyfully wriggling his muscular figurend snorted with satisfaction as he poured the water over his headith hands blackened to the wrists. There were sounds of menlapping one another, yelling, and puffing.
	Everywhere on the bank, on the dam, and in the pond, there wasealthy, white, muscular flesh. The officer, Timokhin, with his redittle nose, standing on the dam wiping himself with a towel, feltonfused at seeing the prince, but made up his mind to address himevertheless.
	"It's very nice, your excellency! Wouldn't you like to?" said he.
	"It's dirty," replied Prince Andrew, making a grimace.
	"We'll clear it out for you in a minute," said Timokhin, and,till undressed, ran off to clear the men out of the pond.
	"The prince wants to bathe."
	"What prince? Ours?" said many voices, and the men were in suchaste to clear out that the prince could hardly stop them. Heecided that he would rather himself with water in the barn.
	"Flesh, bodies, cannon fodder!" he thought, and he looked at his ownaked body and shuddered, not from cold but from a sense of disgustnd horror he did not himself understand, aroused by the sight of thatmmense number of bodies splashing about in the dirty pond.
	On the seventh of August Prince Bagration wrote as follows fromis quarters at Mikhaylovna on the Smolensk road:
	Dear Count Alexis Andreevich- (He was writing to Arakcheev butnew that his letter would be read by the Emperor, and thereforeeighed every word in it to the best of his ability.)
	I expect the Minister [Barclay de Tolly] has already reported thebandonment of Smolensk to the enemy. It is pitiable and sad, andhe whole army is in despair that this most important place has beenantonly abandoned. I, for my part, begged him personally mostrgently and finally wrote him, but nothing would induce him toonsent. I swear to you on my honor that Napoleon was in such a fix asever before and might have lost half his army but could not haveaken Smolensk. Our troops fought, and are fighting, as neverefore. With fifteen thousand men I held the enemy at bay forhirty-five hours and beat him; but he would not hold out even forourteen hours. It is disgraceful, a stain on our army, and as forim, he ought, it seems to me, not to live. If he reports that ourosses were great, it is not true; perhaps about four thousand, notore, and not even that; but even were they ten thousand, that'sar! But the enemy has lost masses...
	What would it have cost him to hold out for another two days? Theyould have had to retire of their own accord, for they had no wateror men or horses. He gave me his word he would not retreat, butuddenly sent instructions that he was retiring that night. Weannot fight in this way, or we may soon bring the enemy to Moscow...
	There is a rumor that you are thinking of peace. God forbid that youhould make peace after all our sacrifices and such insane retreats!ou would set all Russia against you and every one of us would feelshamed to wear the uniform. If it has come to this- we must fights long as Russia can and as long as there are men able to stand...
	One man ought to be in command, and not two. Your Minister mayerhaps be good as a Minister, but as a general he is not merely badut execrable, yet to him is entrusted the fate of our wholeountry.... I am really frantic with vexation; forgive my writingoldly. It is clear that the man who advocates the conclusion of aeace, and that the Minister should command the army, does not loveur sovereign and desires the ruin of us all. So I write yourankly: call out the militia. For the Minister is leading theseisitors after him to Moscow in a most masterly way. The whole armyeels great suspicion of the Imperial aide-de-camp Wolzogen. He isaid to be more Napoleon's man than ours, and he is always advisinghe Minister. I am not merely civil to him but obey him like aorporal, though I am his senior. This is painful, but, loving myenefactor and sovereign, I submit. Only I am sorry for the Emperorhat he entrusts our fine army to such as he. Consider that on ouretreat we have lost by fatigue and left in the hospital more thanifteen thousand men, and had we attacked this would not haveappened. Tell me, for God's sake, what will Russia, our motherussia, say to our being so frightened, and why are we abandoningur good and gallant Fatherland to such rabble and implanting feelingsf hatred and shame in all our subjects? What are we scared at andf whom are we afraid? I am not to blame that the Minister isacillating, a coward, dense, dilatory, and has all bad qualities. Thehole army bewails it and calls down curses upon him...BK10|CH6
	CHAPTER VI
	Among the innumerable categories applicable to the phenomena ofuman life one may discriminate between those in which substancerevails and those in which form prevails. To the latter- asistinguished from village, country, provincial, or even Moscowife- we may allot Petersburg life, and especially the life of itsalons. That life of the salons is unchanging. Since the year 1805e had made peace and had again quarreled with Bonaparte and hadade constitutions and unmade them again, but the salons of Annaavlovna Helene remained just as they had been- the one seven andhe other five years before. At Anna Pavlovna's they talked witherplexity of Bonaparte's successes just as before and saw in them andn the subservience shown to him by the European sovereigns aalicious conspiracy, the sole object of which was to causenpleasantness and anxiety to the court circle of which Annaavlovna was the representative. And in Helene's salon, whichumyantsev himself honored with his visits, regarding Helene as aemarkably intelligent woman, they talked with the same ecstasy in812 as in 1808 of the "great nation" and the "great man," andegretted our rupture with France, a rupture which, according to them,ught to be promptly terminated by peace.
	Of late, since the Emperor's return from the army, there had beenome excitement in these conflicting salon circles and someemonstrations of hostility to one another, but each camp retained itswn tendency. In Anna Pavlovna's circle only those Frenchmen weredmitted who were deep-rooted legitimists, and patriotic views werexpressed to the effect that one ought not to go to the French theaternd that to maintain the French troupe was costing the government asuch as a whole army corps. The progress of the war was eagerlyollowed, and only the reports most flattering to our army wereirculated. In the French circle of Helene and Rumyantsev theeports of the cruelty of the enemy and of the war were contradictednd all Napoleon's attempts at conciliation were discussed. In thatircle they discountenanced those who advised hurried preparations for removal to Kazan of the court and the girls' educationalstablishments under the patronage of the Dowager Empress. In Helene'sircle the war in general was regarded as a series of formalemonstrations which would very soon end in peace, and the viewrevailed expressed by Bilibin- who now in Petersburg was quite atome in Helene's house, which every clever man was obliged to visit-hat not by gunpowder but by those who invented it would matters beettled. In that circle the Moscow enthusiasm- news of which hadeached Petersburg simultaneously with the Emperor's return- wasidiculed sarcastically and very cleverly, though with much caution.
	Anna Pavlovna's circle on the contrary was enraptured by thisnthusiasm and spoke of it as Plutarch speaks of the deeds of thencients. Prince Vasili, who still occupied his former importantosts, formed a connecting link between these two circles. Heisited his "good friend Anna Pavlovna" as well as his daughter'sdiplomatic salon," and often in his constant comings and goingsetween the two camps became confused and said at Helene's what hehould have said at Anna Pavlovna's and vice versa.
	Soon after the Emperor's return Prince Vasili in a conversationbout the war at Anna Pavlovna's severely condemned Barclay deolly, but was undecided as to who ought to be appointed commandern chief. One of the visitors, usually spoken of as "a man of greaterit," having described how he had that day seen Kutuzov, the newlyhosen chief of the Petersburg militia, presiding over thenrollment of recruits at the Treasury, cautiously ventured to suggesthat Kutuzov would be the man to satisfy all requirements.
	Anna Pavlovna remarked with a melancholy smile that Kutuzov had doneothing but cause the Emperor annoyance.
	"I have talked and talked at the Assembly of the Nobility," Princeasili interrupted, "but they did not listen to me. I told them hislection as chief of the militia would not please the Emperor. Theyid not listen to me.
	"It's all this mania for opposition," he went on. "And who for? Its all because we want to ape the foolish enthusiasm of thoseuscovites," Prince Vasili continued, forgetting for a moment thathough at Helene's one had to ridicule the Moscow enthusiasm, atnna Pavlovna's one had to be ecstatic about it. But he retrievedis mistake at once. "Now, is it suitable that Count Kutuzov, theldest general in Russia, should preside at that tribunal? He will getothing for his pains! How could they make a man commander in chiefho cannot mount a horse, who drops asleep at a council, and has theery worst morals! A good reputation he made for himself at Bucharest! don't speak of his capacity as a general, but at a time like thisow they appoint they appoint a decrepit, blind old man, positivelylind? A fine idea to have a blind general! He can't see anything.o play blindman's bluff? He can't see at all!"
	No one replied to his remarks.
	This was quite correct on the twenty-fourth of July. But on thewenty-ninth of July Kutuzov received the title of Prince. Thisight indicate a wish to get rid of him, and therefore Prince Vasili'spinion continued to be correct though he was not now in any hurryo express it. But on the eighth of August a committee, consistingf Field Marshal Saltykov, Arakcheev, Vyazmitinov, Lopukhin, andochubey met to consider the progress of the war. This committeeame to the conclusion that our failures were due to a want of unityn the command and though the members of the committee were aware ofhe Emperor's dislike of Kutuzov, after a short deliberation theygreed to advise his appointment as commander in chief. That sameay Kutuzov was appointed commander in chief with full powers over thermies and over the whole region occupied by them.
	On the ninth of August Prince Vasili at Anna Pavlovna's again methe "man of great merit." The latter was very attentive to Annaavlovna because he wanted to be appointed director of one of theducational establishments for young ladies. Prince Vasili entered theoom with the air of a happy conqueror who has attained the objectf his desires.
	"Well, have you heard the great news? Prince Kutuzov is fieldarshal! All dissensions are at an end! I am so glad, so delighted! Atast we have a man!" said he, glancing sternly and significantly roundt everyone in the drawing room.
	The "man of great merit," despite his desire to obtain the post ofirector, could not refrain from reminding Prince Vasili of his formerpinion. Though this was impolite to Prince Vasili in Annaavlovna's drawing room, and also to Anna Pavlovna herself who hadeceived the news with delight, he could not resist the temptation.
	"But, Prince, they say he is blind!" said he, reminding Princeasili of his own words.
	"Eh? Nonsense! He sees well enough," said Prince Vasili rapidly,n a deep voice and with a slight cough- the voice and cough withhich he was wont to dispose of all difficulties.
	"He sees well enough," he added. "And what I am so pleased about,"e went on, "is that our sovereign has given him full powers overll the armies and the whole region- powers no commander in chief everad before. He is a second autocrat," he concluded with a victoriousmile.
	"God grant it! God grant it!" said Anna Pavlovna.
	The "man of great merit," who was still a novice in court circles,ishing to flatter Anna Pavlovna by defending her former position onhis question, observed:
	"It is said that the Emperor was reluctant to give Kutuzov thoseowers. They say he blushed like a girl to whom Joconde is read,hen he said to Kutuzov: 'Your Emperor and the Fatherland award youhis honor.'
	"Perhaps the heart took no part in that speech," said Anna Pavlovna.
	"Oh, no, no!" warmly rejoined Prince Vasili, who would not now yieldutuzov to anyone; in his opinion Kutuzov was not only admirableimself, but was adored by everybody. "No, that's impossible," saide, "for our sovereign appreciated him so highly before."
	"God grant only that Prince Kutuzov assumes real power and doesot allow anyone to put a spoke in his wheel," observed Anna Pavlovna.
	Understanding at once to whom she alluded, Prince Vasili said in ahisper:
	"I know for a fact that Kutuzov made it an absolute condition thathe Tsarevich should not be with the army. Do you know what he said tohe Emperor?"
	And Prince Vasili repeated the words supposed to have been spoken byutuzov to the Emperor. "I can neither punish him if he does wrong noreward him if he does right."
	"Oh, a very wise man is Prince Kutuzov! I have known him a longime!"
	"They even say," remarked the "man of great merit" who did not yetossess courtly tact, "that his excellency made it an expressondition that the sovereign himself should not be with the army."
	As soon as he said this both Prince Vasili and Anna Pavlovnaurned away from him and glanced sadly at one another with a sigh atis naivete.BK10|CH7
	CHAPTER VII
	While this was taking place in Petersburg the French had alreadyassed Smolensk and were drawing nearer and nearer to Moscow.apoleon's historian Thiers, like other of his historians, trying toustify his hero says that he was drawn to the walls of Moscow againstis will. He is as right as other historians who look for thexplanation of historic events in the will of one man; he is asight as the Russian historians who maintain that Napoleon was drawno Moscow by the skill of the Russian commanders. Here besides the lawf retrospection, which regards all the past as a preparation forvents that subsequently occur, the law of reciprocity comes in,onfusing the whole matter. A good chessplayer having lost a game isincerely convinced that his loss resulted from a mistake he madend looks for that mistake in the opening, but forgets that at eachtage of the game there were similar mistakes and that none of hisoves were perfect. He only notices the mistake to which he paysttention, because his opponent took advantage of it. How much moreomplex than this is the game of war, which occurs under certainimits of time, and where it is not one will that manipulates lifelessbjects, but everything results from innumerable conflicts ofarious wills!
	After Smolensk Napoleon sought a battle beyond Dorogobuzh at Vyazma,nd then at Tsarevo-Zaymishche, but it happened that owing to aonjunction of innumerable circumstances the Russians could not giveattle till they reached Borodino, seventy miles from Moscow. Fromyazma Napoleon ordered a direct advance on Moscow.
	Moscou, la capitale asiatique de ce grand empire, la ville sacreees peuples d'Alexandre, Moscou avec ses innombrables eglises en formee pagodes chinoises,* this Moscow gave Napoleon's imagination noest. On the march from Vyazma to Tsarevo-Zaymishche he rode his lightay bobtailed ambler accompanied by his Guards, his bodyguard, hisages, and aides-de-camp. Berthier, his chief of staff, dropped behindo question a Russian prisoner captured by the cavalry. Followed byelorgne d'Ideville, an interpreter, he overtook Napoleon at aallop and reined in his horse with an amused expression.
	*"Moscow, the Asiatic capital of this great empire, the sacredity of Alexander's people, Moscow with its innumerable churcheshaped like Chinese pagodas."
	"Well?" asked Napoleon.
	"One of Platov's Cossacks says that Platov's corps is joining upith the main army and that Kutuzov has been appointed commander inhief. He is a very shrewd and garrulous fellow."
	Napoleon smiled and told them to give the Cossack a horse andring the man to him. He wished to talk to him himself. Severaldjutants galloped off, and an hour later, Lavrushka, the serf Denisovad handed over to Rostov, rode up to Napoleon in an orderly'sacket and on a French cavalry saddle, with a merry, and tipsy face.apoleon told him to ride by his side and began questioning him.
	"You are a Cossack?"
	"Yes, a Cossack, your Honor."
	"The Cossack, not knowing in what company he was, for Napoleon'slain appearance had nothing about it that would reveal to an Orientalind the presence of a monarch, talked with extreme familiarity of thencidents of the war," says Thiers, narrating this episode. In realityavrushka, having got drunk the day before and left his masterinnerless, had been whipped and sent to the village in quest ofhickens, where he engaged in looting till the French took himrisoner. Lavrushka was one of those coarse, bare-faced lackeys whoave seen all sorts of things, consider it necessary to doverything in a mean and cunning way, are ready to render any sortf service to their master, and are keen at guessing their master'saser impulses, especially those prompted by vanity and pettiness.
	Finding himself in the company of Napoleon, whose identity he hadasily and surely recognized, Lavrushka was not in the least abashedut merely did his utmost to gain his new master's favor.
	He knew very well that this was Napoleon, but Napoleon's presenceould no more intimidate him than Rostov's, or a sergeant major's withhe rods, would have done, for he had nothing that either the sergeantajor or Napoleon could deprive him of.
	So he rattled on, telling all the gossip he had heard among therderlies. Much of it true. But when Napoleon asked him whether theussians thought they would beat Bonaparte or not, Lavrushka screwedp his eyes and considered.
	In this question he saw subtle cunning, as men of his type seeunning in everything, so he frowned and did not answer immediately.
	"It's like this," he said thoughtfully, "if there's a battle soon,ours will win. That's right. But if three days pass, then after that,ell, then that same battle will not soon be over."
	Lelorgne d'Ideville smilingly interpreted this speech to Napoleonhus: "If a battle takes place within the next three days the Frenchill win, but if later, God knows what will happen." Napoleon didot smile, though he was evidently in high good humor, and herdered these words to be repeated.
	Lavrushka noticed this and to entertain him further, pretendingot to know who Napoleon was, added:
	"We know that you have Bonaparte and that he has beaten everybody inhe world, but we are a different matter..."- without knowing why orow this bit of boastful patriotism slipped out at the end.
	The interpreter translated these words without the last phrase,nd Bonaparte smiled. "The young Cossack made his mightynterlocutor smile," says Thiers. After riding a few paces in silence,apoleon turned to Berthier and said he wished to see how the newshat he was talking to the Emperor himself, to that very Emperor whoad written his immortally victorious name on the Pyramids, wouldffect this enfant du Don.*
	*"Child of the Don."
	The fact was accordingly conveyed to Lavrushka.
	Lavrushka, understanding that this was done to perplex him andhat Napoleon expected him to be frightened, to gratify his newasters promptly pretended to be astonished and awe-struck, opened hisyes wide, and assumed the expression he usually put on when takeno be whipped. "As soon as Napoleon's interpreter had spoken," sayshiers, "the Cossack, seized by amazement, did not utter another word,ut rode on, his eyes fixed on the conqueror whose fame had reachedim across the steppes of the East. All his loquacity was suddenlyrrested and replaced by a naive and silent feeling of admiration.apoleon, after making the Cossack a present, had him set free like bird restored to its native fields."
	Napoleon rode on, dreaming of the Moscow that so appealed to hismagination, and "the bird restored to its native fields" gallopedo our outposts, inventing on the way all that had not taken place buthat he meant to relate to his comrades. What had really taken placee did not wish to relate because it seemed to him not worthelling. He found the Cossacks, inquired for the regiment operatingith Platov's detachment and by evening found his master, Nicholasostov, quartered at Yankovo. Rostov was just mounting to go for aide round the neighboring villages with Ilyin; he let Lavrushkaave another horse and took him along with him.BK10|CH8
	CHAPTER VIII
	Princess Mary was not in Moscow and out of danger as Prince Andrewupposed.
	After the return of Alpatych from Smolensk the old prince suddenlyeemed to awake as from a dream. He ordered the militiamen to bealled up from the villages and armed, and wrote a letter to theommander in chief informing him that he had resolved to remain atald Hills to the last extremity and to defend it, leaving to theommander in chief's discretion to take measures or not for theefense of Bald Hills, where one of Russia's oldest generals woulde captured or killed, and he announced to his household that he wouldemain at Bald Hills.
	But while himself remaining, he gave instructions for theeparture of the princess and Dessalles with the little prince toogucharovo and thence to Moscow. Princess Mary, alarmed by herather's feverish and sleepless activity after his previous apathy,ould not bring herself to leave him alone and for the first time iner life ventured to disobey him. She refused to go away and herather's fury broke over her in a terrible storm. He repeated everynjustice he had ever inflicted on her. Trying to convict her, he tolder she had worn him out, had caused his quarrel with his son, hadarbored nasty suspicions of him, making it the object of her lifeo poison his existence, and he drove her from his study telling herhat if she did not go away it was all the same to him. He declaredhat he did not wish to remember her existence and warned her not toare to let him see her. The fact that he did not, as she hadeared, order her to be carried away by force but only told her not toet him see her cheered Princess Mary. She knew it was a proof that inhe depth of his soul he was glad she was remaining at home and hadot gone away.
	The morning after little Nicholas had left, the old prince donnedis full uniform and prepared to visit the commander in chief. Hisaleche was already at the door. Princess Mary saw him walk out of theouse in his uniform wearing all his orders and go down the gardeno review his armed peasants and domestic serfs. She sat by the windowistening to his voice which reached her from the garden. Suddenlyeveral men came running up the avenue with frightened faces.
	Princess Mary ran out to the porch, down the flower-bordered path,nd into the avenue. A large crowd of militiamen and domestics wereoving toward her, and in their midst several men were supporting byhe armpits and dragging along a little old man in a uniform andecorations. She ran up to him and, in the play of the sunlight thatell in small round spots through the shade of the lime-tree avenue,ould not be sure what change there was in his face. All she could seeas that his former stern and determined expression had altered to onef timidity and submission. On seeing his daughter he moved hiselpless lips and made a hoarse sound. It was impossible to make outhat he wanted. He was lifted up, carried to his study, and laid onhe very couch he had so feared of late.
	The doctor, who was fetched that same night, bled him and saidhat the prince had had seizure a paralyzing his right side.
	It was becoming more and more dangerous to remain at Bald Hills, andext day they moved the prince to Bogucharovo, the doctor accompanyingim.
	By the time they reached Bogucharovo, Dessalles and the littlerince had already left for Moscow.
	For three weeks the old prince lay stricken by paralysis in theew house Prince Andrew had built at Bogucharovo, ever in the sametate, getting neither better nor worse. He was unconscious and layike a distorted corpse. He muttered unceasingly, his eyebrows andips twitching, and it was impossible to tell whether he understoodhat was going on around him or not. One thing was certain- that heas suffering and wished to say something. But what it was, no oneould tell: it might be some caprice of a sick and half-crazy man,r it might relate to public affairs, or possibly to family concerns.
	The doctor said this restlessness did not mean anything and wasue to physical causes; but Princess Mary thought he wished to teller something, and the fact that her presence always increased hisestlessness confirmed her opinion.
	He was evidently suffering both physically and mentally. There waso hope of recovery. It was impossible for him to travel, it would noto to let him die on the road. "Would it not be better if the endid come, the very end?" Princess Mary sometimes thought. Night anday, hardly sleeping at all, she watched him and, terrible to say,ften watched him not with hope of finding signs of improvement butishing to find symptoms of the approach of the end.
	Strange as it was to her to acknowledge this feeling in herself, yethere it was. And what seemed still more terrible to her was thatince her father's illness began (perhaps even sooner, when she stayedith him expecting something to happen), all the personal desiresnd hopes that had been forgotten or sleeping within her had awakened.houghts that had not entered her mind for years- thoughts of a liferee from the fear of her father, and even the possibility of love andf family happiness- floated continually in her imagination likeemptations of the devil. Thrust them aside as she would, questionsontinually recurred to her as to how she would order her life now,fter that. These were temptations of the devil and Princess Mary knewt. She knew that the sole weapon against him was prayer, and sheried to pray. She assumed an attitude of prayer, looked at the icons,epeated the words of a prayer, but she could not pray. She felthat a different world had now taken possession of her- the life of world of strenuous and free activity, quite opposed to the spiritualorld in which till now she had been confined and in which herreatest comfort had been prayer. She could not pray, could noteep, and worldly cares took possession of her.
	It was becoming dangerous to remain in Bogucharovo. News of thepproach of the French came from all sides, and in one village, teniles from Bogucharovo, a homestead had been looted by Frencharauders.
	The doctor insisted on the necessity of moving the prince; therovincial Marshal of the Nobility sent an official to Princess Maryo persuade her to get away as quickly as possible, and the head ofhe rural police having come to Bogucharovo urged the same thing,aying that the French were only some twenty-five miles away, thatrench proclamations were circulating in the villages, and that if therincess did not take her father away before the fifteenth, he couldot answer for the consequences.
	The princess decided to leave on the fifteenth. The cares ofreparation and giving orders, for which everyone came to her,ccupied her all day. She spent the night of the fourteenth assual, without undressing, in the room next to the one where therince lay. Several times, waking up, she heard his groans anduttering, the creak of his bed, and the steps of Tikhon and theoctor when they turned him over. Several times she listened at theoor, and it seemed to her that his mutterings were louder thansual and that they turned him over oftener. She could not sleep andeveral times went to the door and listened, wishing to enter butot deciding to do so. Though he did not speak, Princess Mary sawnd knew how unpleasant every sign of anxiety on his account was toim. She had noticed with what dissatisfaction he turned from the lookhe sometimes involuntarily fixed on him. She knew that her going inuring the night at an unusual hour would irritate him.
	But never had she felt so grieved for him or so much afraid ofosing him. She recalled all her life with him and in every word andct of his found an expression of his love of her. Occasionally amidhese memories temptations of the devil would surge into hermagination: thoughts of how things would be after his death, andow her new, liberated life would be ordered. But she drove thesehoughts away with disgust. Toward morning he became quiet and sheell asleep.
	She woke late. That sincerity which often comes with waking showeder clearly what chiefly concerned her about her father's illness.n waking she listened to what was going on behind the door and,earing him groan, said to herself with a sigh that things weretill the same.
	"But what could have happened? What did I want? I want his death!"he cried with a feeling of loathing for herself.
	She washed, dressed, said her prayers, and went out to the porch. Inront of it stood carriages without horses and things were beingacked into the vehicles.
	It was a warm, gray morning. Princess Mary stopped at the porch,till horrified by her spiritual baseness and trying to arrange herhoughts before going to her father. The doctor came downstairs andent out to her.
	"He is a little better today," said he. "I was looking for you.ne can make out something of what he is saying. His head islearer. Come in, he is asking for you..."
	Princess Mary's heart beat so violently at this news that she grewale and leaned against the wall to keep from falling. To see him,alk to him, feel his eyes on her now that her whole soul wasverflowing with those dreadful, wicked temptations, was a tormentf joy and terror.
	"Come," said the doctor.
	Princess Mary entered her father's room and went up to his bed. Heas lying on his back propped up high, and his small bony hands withheir knotted purple veins were lying on the quilt; his left eye gazedtraight before him, his right eye was awry, and his brows and lipsotionless. He seemed altogether so thin, small, and pathetic. Hisace seemed to have shriveled or melted; his features had grownmaller. Princess Mary went up and kissed his hand. His left handressed hers so that she understood that he had long been waitingor her to come. He twitched her hand, and his brows and lips quiveredngrily.
	She looked at him in dismay trying to guess what he wanted of her.hen she changed her position so that his left eye could see herace he calmed down, not taking his eyes off her for some seconds.hen his lips and tongue moved, sounds came, and he began to speak,azing timidly and imploringly at her, evidently afraid that she mightot understand.
	Straining all her faculties Princess Mary looked at him. The comicfforts with which he moved his tongue made her drop her eyes and withifficulty repress the sobs that rose to her throat. He saidomething, repeating the same words several times. She could notnderstand them, but tried to guess what he was saying and inquiringlyepeated the words he uttered.
	"Mmm...ar...ate...ate..." he repeated several times.
	It was quite impossible to understand these sounds. The doctorhought he had guessed them, and inquiringly repeated: "Mary, areou afraid?" The prince shook his head, again repeated the sameounds.
	"My mind, my mind aches?" questioned Princess Mary.
	He made a mumbling sound in confirmation of this, took her hand, andegan pressing it to different parts of his breast as if trying toind the right place for it.
	"Always thoughts... about you... thoughts..." he then uttered muchore clearly than he had done before, now that he was sure of beingnderstood.
	Princess Mary pressed her head against his hand, trying to hideer sobs and tears.
	He moved his hand over her hair.
	"I have been calling you all night..." he brought out.
	"If only I had known..." she said through her tears. "I was afraido come in."
	He pressed her hand.
	"Weren't you asleep?"
	"No, I did not sleep," said Princess Mary, shaking her head.
	Unconsciously imitating her father, she now tried to express herselfs he did, as much as possible by signs, and her tongue too seemedo move with difficulty.
	"Dear one... Dearest..." Princess Mary could not quite make out whate had said, but from his look it was clear that he had uttered aender caressing word such as he had never used to her before. "Whyidn't you come in?"
	"And I was wishing for his death!" thought Princess Mary.
	He was silent awhile.
	"Thank you... daughter dear!... for all, for all... forgive!...hank you!... forgive!... thank you!..." and tears began to flowrom his eyes. "Call Andrew!" he said suddenly, and a childish,imid expression of doubt showed itself on his face as he spoke.
	He himself seemed aware that his demand was meaningless. So at leastt seemed to Princess Mary.
	"I have a letter from him," she replied.
	He glanced at her with timid surprise.
	"Where is he?"
	"He's with the army, Father, at Smolensk."
	He closed his eyes and remained silent a long time. Then as if innswer to his doubts and to confirm the fact that now he understoodnd remembered everything, he nodded his head and reopened his eyes.
	"Yes," he said, softly and distinctly. "Russia has perished. They'veestroyed her."
	And he began to sob, and again tears flowed from his eyes.rincess Mary could no longer restrain herself and wept while sheazed at his face.
	Again he closed his eyes. His sobs ceased, he pointed to his eyes,nd Tikhon, understanding him, wiped away the tears.
	Then he again opened his eyes and said something none of themould understand for a long time, till at last Tikhon understood andepeated it. Princess Mary had sought the meaning of his words inhe mood in which he had just been speaking. She thought he waspeaking of Russia, or Prince Andrew, of herself, of his grandson,r of his own death, and so she could not guess his words.
	"Put on your white dress. I like it," was what he said.
	Having understood this Princess Mary sobbed still louder, and theoctor taking her arm led her out to the veranda, soothing her andrying to persuade her to prepare for her journey. When she had lefthe room the prince again began speaking about his son, about the war,nd about the Emperor, angrily twitching his brows and raising hisoarse voice, and then he had a second and final stroke.
	Princess Mary stayed on the veranda. The day had cleared, it was hotnd sunny. She could understand nothing, think of nothing and feelothing, except passionate love for her father, love such as shehought she had never felt till that moment. She ran out sobbingnto the garden and as far as the pond, along the avenues of youngime trees Prince Andrew had planted.
	"Yes... I... I... I wished for his death! Yes, I wanted it to enduicker.... I wished to be at peace.... And what will become of me?hat use will peace be when he is no longer here?" Princess Maryurmured, pacing the garden with hurried steps and pressing herands to her bosom which heaved with convulsive sobs.
	When she had completed the tour of the garden, which brought hergain to the house, she saw Mademoiselle Bourienne- who had remainedt Bogucharovo and did not wish to leave it- coming toward her with stranger. This was the Marshal of the Nobility of the district,ho had come personally to point out to the princess the necessity forer prompt departure. Princess Mary listened without understandingim; she led him to the house, offered him lunch, and sat down withim. Then, excusing herself, she went to the door of the oldrince's room. The doctor came out with an agitated face and saidhe could not enter.
	"Go away, Princess! Go away... go away!"
	She returned to the garden and sat down on the grass at the footf the slope by the pond, where no one could see her. She did not knowow long she had been there when she was aroused by the sound of aoman's footsteps running along the path. She rose and saw Dunyashaer maid, who was evidently looking for her, and who stoppeduddenly as if in alarm on seeing her mistress.
	"Please come, Princess... The Prince," said Dunyasha in a breakingoice.
	"Immediately, I'm coming, I'm coming!" replied the princessurriedly, not giving Dunyasha time to finish what she was saying, andrying to avoid seeing the girl she ran toward the house.
	"Princess, it's God's will! You must be prepared for everything,"aid the Marshal, meeting her at the house door.
	"Let me alone; it's not true!" she cried angrily to him.
	The doctor tried to stop her. She pushed him aside and ran to herather's door. "Why are these people with frightened faces stoppinge? I don't want any of them! And what are they doing here?" shehought. She opened the door and the bright daylight in thatreviously darkened room startled her. In the room were her nursend other women. They all drew back from the bed, making way forer. He was still lying on the bed as before, but the stern expressionf his quiet face made Princess Mary stop short on the threshold.
	"No, he's not dead- it's impossible!" she told herself andpproached him, and repressing the terror that seized her, she presseder lips to his cheek. But she stepped back immediately. All the forcef the tenderness she had been feeling for him vanished instantlynd was replaced by a feeling of horror at what lay there beforeer. "No, he is no more! He is not, but here where he was is somethingnfamiliar and hostile, some dreadful, terrifying, and repellentystery!" And hiding her face in her hands, Princess Mary sank intohe arms of the doctor, who held her up.
	In the presence of Tikhon and the doctor the women washed what hadeen the prince, tied his head up with a handkerchief that the mouthhould not stiffen while open, and with another handkerchief tiedogether the legs that were already spreading apart. Then they dressedim in uniform with his decorations and placed his shriveled littleody on a table. Heaven only knows who arranged all this and when, butt all got done as if of its own accord. Toward night candles wereurning round his coffin, a pall was spread over it, the floor wastrewn with sprays of juniper, a printed band was tucked in underis shriveled head, and in a corner of the room sat a chantereading the psalms.
	Just as horses shy and snort and gather about a dead horse, so thenmates of the house and strangers crowded into the drawing room roundhe coffin- the Marshal, the village Elder, peasant women- and allith fixed and frightened eyes, crossing themselves, bowed andissed the old prince's cold and stiffened hand.BK10|CH9
	CHAPTER IX
	Until Prince Andrew settled in Bogucharovo its owners had alwayseen absentees, and its peasants were of quite a different characterrom those of Bald Hills. They differed from them in speech, dress,nd disposition. They were called steppe peasants. The old prince usedo approve of them for their endurance at work when they came toald Hills to help with the harvest or to dig ponds, and ditches,ut he disliked them for their boorishness.
	Prince Andrew's last stay at Bogucharovo, when he introducedospitals and schools and reduced the quitrent the peasants had toay, had not softened their disposition but had on the contrarytrengthened in them the traits of character the old prince calledoorishness. Various obscure rumors were always current among them: atne time a rumor that they would all be enrolled as Cossacks; atnother of a new religion to which they were all to be converted; thenf some proclamation of the Tsar's and of an oath to the Tsar Pauln 1797 (in connection with which it was rumored that freedom had beenranted them but the landowners had stopped it), then of Peteredorovich's return to the throne in seven years' time, whenverything would be made free and so "simple" that there would be noestrictions. Rumors of the war with Bonaparte and his invasion wereonnected in their minds with the same sort of vague notions ofntichrist, the end of the world, and "pure freedom."
	In the vicinity of Bogucharovo were large villages belonging tohe crown or to owners whose serfs paid quitrent and could workhere they pleased. There were very few resident landlords in theeighborhood and also very few domestic or literate serfs, and inhe lives of the peasantry of those parts the mysterious undercurrentsn the life of the Russian people, the causes and meaning of which areo baffling to contemporaries, were more clearly and stronglyoticeable than among others. One instance, which had occurred somewenty years before, was a movement among the peasants to emigrateo some unknown "warm rivers." Hundreds of peasants, among them theogucharovo folk, suddenly began selling their cattle and moving inhole families toward the southeast. As birds migrate to somewhereeyond the sea, so these men with their wives and children streamed tohe southeast, to parts where none of them had ever been. They set offn caravans, bought their freedom one by one or ran away, and drove oralked toward the "warm rivers." Many of them were punished, some sento Siberia, many died of cold and hunger on the road, many returned ofheir own accord, and the movement died down of itself just as itad sprung up, without apparent reason. But such undercurrents stillxisted among the people and gathered new forces ready to manifesthemselves just as strangely, unexpectedly, and at the same timeimply, naturally, and forcibly. Now in 1812, to anyone living inlose touch with these people it was apparent that these undercurrentsere acting strongly and nearing an eruption.
	Alpatych, who had reached Bogucharovo shortly before the oldrince's death, noticed an agitation among the peasants, and thatontrary to what was happening in the Bald Hills district, wherever a radius of forty miles all the peasants were moving away andeaving their villages to be devastated by the Cossacks, theeasants in the steppe region round Bogucharovo were, it wasumored, in touch with the French, received leaflets from them thatassed from hand to hand, and did not migrate. He learned fromomestic serfs loyal to him that the peasant Karp, who possessed greatnfluence in the village commune and had recently been away driving government transport, had returned with news that the Cossacksere destroying deserted villages, but that the French did not harmhem. Alpatych also knew that on the previous day another peasantad even brought from the village of Visloukhovo, which was occupiedy the French, a proclamation by a French general that no harm woulde done to the inhabitants, and if they remained they would be paidor anything taken from them. As proof of this the peasant had broughtrom Visloukhovo a hundred rubles in notes (he did not know thathey were false) paid to him in advance for hay.
	More important still, Alpatych learned that on the morning of theery day he gave the village Elder orders to collect carts to move therincess' luggage from Bogucharovo, there had been a village meetingt which it had been decided not to move but to wait. Yet there was noime to waste. On the fifteenth, the day of the old prince's death,he Marshal had insisted on Princess Mary's leaving at once, as it wasecoming dangerous. He had told her that after the sixteenth heould not be responsible for what might happen. On the evening ofhe day the old prince died the Marshal went away, promising to returnext day for the funeral. But this he was unable to do, for heeceived tidings that the French had unexpectedly advanced, and hadarely time to remove his own family and valuables from his estate.
	For some thirty years Bogucharovo had been managed by the villagelder, Dron, whom the old prince called by the diminutive "Dronushka."
	Dron was one of those physically and mentally vigorous peasantsho grow big beards as soon as they are of age and go on unchangedill they are sixty or seventy, without a gray hair or the loss of aooth, as straight and strong at sixty as at thirty.
	Soon after the migration to the "warm rivers," in which he had takenart like the rest, Dron was made village Elder and overseer ofogucharovo, and had since filled that post irreproachably forwenty-three years. The peasants feared him more than they did theiraster. The masters, both the old prince and the young, and theteward respected him and jestingly called him "the Minister."uring the whole time of his service Dron had never been drunk or ill,ever after sleepless nights or the hardest tasks had he shown theeast fatigue, and though he could not read he had never forgotten aingle money account or the number of quarters of flour in any ofhe endless cartloads he sold for the prince, nor a single shock ofhe whole corn crop on any single acre of the Bogucharovo fields.
	Alpatych, arriving from the devastated Bald Hills estate, sent foris Dron on the day of the prince's funeral and told him to havewelve horses got ready for the princess' carriages and eighteen cartsor the things to be removed from Bogucharovo. Though the peasantsaid quitrent, Alpatych thought no difficulty would be made aboutomplying with this order, for there were two hundred and thirtyouseholds at work in Bogucharovo and the peasants were well to do.ut on hearing the order Dron lowered his eyes and remained silent.lpatych named certain peasants he knew, from whom he told him to takehe carts.
	Dron replied that the horses of these peasants were away carting.lpatych named others, but they too, according to Dron, had noorses available: some horses were carting for the government,thers were too weak, and others had died for want of fodder. Iteemed that no horses could be had even for the carriages, much lessor the carting.
	Alpatych looked intently at Dron and frowned. Just as Dron was aodel village Elder, so Alpatych had not managed the prince'sstates for twenty years in vain. He a model steward, possessing inhe highest degree the faculty of divining the needs and instinctsf those he dealt with. Having glanced at Dron he at once understoodhat his answers did not express his personal views but the generalood of the Bogucharovo commune, by which the Elder had already beenarried away. But he also knew that Dron, who had acquired propertynd was hated by the commune, must be hesitating between the twoamps: the masters' and the serfs'. He noticed this hesitation inron's look and therefore frowned and moved closer up to him.
	"Now just listen, Dronushka," said he. "Don't talk nonsense to me.is excellency Prince Andrew himself gave me orders to move all theeople away and not leave them with the enemy, and there is an orderrom the Tsar about it too. Anyone who stays is a traitor to the Tsar.o you hear?"
	"I hear," Dron answered without lifting his eyes.
	Alpatych was not satisfied with this reply.
	"Eh, Dron, it will turn out badly!" he said, shaking his head.
	"The power is in your hands," Dron rejoined sadly.
	"Eh, Dron, drop it!" Alpatych repeated, withdrawing his hand fromis bosom and solemnly pointing to the floor at Dron's feet. "I canee through you and three yards into the ground under you," heontinued, gazing at the floor in front of Dron.
	Dron was disconcerted, glanced furtively at Alpatych and againowered his eyes.
	"You drop this nonsense and tell the people to get ready to leaveheir homes and go to Moscow and to get carts ready for tomorroworning for the princess' things. And don't go to any meetingourself, do you hear?"
	Dron suddenly fell on his knees.
	"Yakov Alpatych, discharge me! Take the keys from me and dischargee, for Christ's sake!"
	"Stop that!" cried Alpatych sternly. "I see through you and threeards under you," he repeated, knowing that his skill in beekeeping,is knowledge of the right time to sow the oats, and the fact thate had been able to retain the old prince's favor for twenty years hadong since gained him the reputation of being a wizard, and that theower of seeing three yards under a man is considered an attributef wizards.
	Dron got up and was about to say something, but Alpatych interruptedim.
	"What is it you have got into your heads, eh?... What are youhinking of, eh?"
	"What am I to do with the people?" said Dron. "They're quiteeside themselves; I have already told them..."
	"'Told them,' I dare say!" said Alpatych. "Are they drinking?" hesked abruptly.
	"Quite beside themselves, Yakov Alpatych; they've fetched anotherarrel."
	"Well, then, listen! I'll go to the police officer, and you tellhem so, and that they must stop this and the carts must be goteady."
	"I understand."
	Alpatych did not insist further. He had managed people for a longime and knew that the chief way to make them obey is to show nouspicion that they can possibly disobey. Having wrung a submissive "Inderstand" from Dron, Alpatych contented himself with that, though heot only doubted but felt almost certain that without the help ofroops the carts would not be forthcoming.
	And so it was, for when evening came no carts had been provided.n the village, outside the drink shop, another meeting was beingeld, which decided that the horses should be driven out into theoods and the carts should not be provided. Without saying anything ofhis to the princess, Alpatych had his own belongings taken out of thearts which had arrived from Bald Hills and had those horses got readyor the princess' carriages. Meanwhile he went himself to the policeuthorities.BK10|CH10
	CHAPTER X
	After her father's funeral Princess Mary shut herself up in her roomnd did not admit anyone. A maid came to the door to say that Alpatychas asking for orders about their departure. (This was before his talkith Dron.) Princess Mary raised herself on the sofa on which shead been lying and replied through the closed door that she did notean to go away and begged to be left in peace.
	The windows of the room in which she was lying looked westward.he lay on the sofa with her face to the wall, fingering the buttonsf the leather cushion and seeing nothing but that cushion, and heronfused thoughts were centered on one subject- the irrevocabilityf death and her own spiritual baseness, which she had notuspected, but which had shown itself during her father's illness. Sheished to pray but did not dare to, dared not in her present statef mind address herself to God. She lay for a long time in thatosition.
	The sun had reached the other side of the house, and its slantingays shone into the open window, lighting up the room and part ofhe morocco cushion at which Princess Mary was looking. The flow ofer thoughts suddenly stopped. Unconsciously she sat up, smootheder hair, got up, and went to the window, involuntarily inhaling thereshness of the clear but windy evening.
	"Yes, you can well enjoy the evening now! He is gone and no one willinder you," she said to herself, and sinking into a chair she let heread fall on the window sill.
	Someone spoke her name in a soft and tender voice from the gardennd kissed her head. She looked up. It was Mademoiselle Bourienne in alack dress and weepers. She softly approached Princess Mary,ighed, kissed her, and immediately began to cry. The princessooked up at her. All their former disharmony and her own jealousyecurred to her mind. But she remembered too how he had changed ofate toward Mademoiselle Bourienne and could not bear to see her,hereby showing how unjust were the reproaches Princess Mary hadentally addressed to her. "Besides, is it for me, for me whoesired his death, to condemn anyone?" she thought.
	Princess Mary vividly pictured to herself the position ofademoiselle Bourienne, whom she had of late kept at a distance, butho yet was dependent on her and living in her house. She felt sorryor her and held out her hand with a glance of gentle inquiry.ademoiselle Bourienne at once began crying again and kissed thatand, speaking of the princess' sorrow and making herself a partner int. She said her only consolation was the fact that the princessllowed her to share her sorrow, that all the old misunderstandingshould sink into nothing but this great grief; that she felt herselflameless in regard to everyone, and that he, from above, saw herffection and gratitude. The princess heard her, not heeding her wordsut occasionally looking up at her and listening to the sound of heroice.
	"Your position is doubly terrible, dear princess," said Mademoiselleourienne after a pause. "I understand that you could not, and cannot,hink of yourself, but with my love for you I must do so.... Haslpatych been to you? Has he spoken to you of going away?" she asked.
	Princess Mary did not answer. She did not understand who was to gor where to. "Is it possible to plan or think of anything now? Is itot all the same?" she thought, and did not reply.
	"You know, chere Marie," said Mademoiselle Bourienne, "that we aren danger- are surrounded by the French. It would be dangerous to moveow. If we go we are almost sure to be taken prisoners, and Godnows..."
	Princess Mary looked at her companion without understanding what sheas talking about.
	"Oh, if anyone knew how little anything matters to me now," sheaid. "Of course I would on no account wish to go away from him....lpatych did say something about going.... Speak to him; I can doothing, nothing, and don't want to...."
	"I've spoken to him. He hopes we should be in time to get awayomorrow, but I think it would now be better to stay here," saidademoiselle Bourienne. "Because, you will agree, chere Marie, to fallnto the hands of the soldiers or of riotous peasants would beerrible."
	Mademoiselle Bourienne took from her reticule a proclamation (notrinted on ordinary Russian paper) of General Rameau's, telling peopleot to leave their homes and that the French authorities wouldfford them proper protection. She handed this to the princess.
	"I think it would be best to appeal to that general," she continued,and and am sure that all due respect would be shown you."
	Princess Mary read the paper, and her face began to quiver withtifled sobs.
	"From whom did you get this?" she asked.
	"They probably recognized that I am French, by my name," repliedademoiselle Bourienne blushing.
	Princess Mary, with the paper in her hand, rose from the windownd with a pale face went out of the room and into what had beenrince Andrew's study.
	"Dunyasha, send Alpatych, or Dronushka, or somebody to me!" sheaid, "and tell Mademoiselle Bourienne not to come to me," shedded, hearing Mademoiselle Bourienne's voice. "We must go at once, atnce!" she said, appalled at the thought of being left in the hands ofhe French.
	"If Prince Andrew heard that I was in the power of the French!hat I, the daughter of Prince Nicholas Bolkonski, asked Generalameau for protection and accepted his favor!" This idea horrifieder, made her shudder, blush, and feel such a rush of anger andride as she had never experienced before. All that was distressing,nd especially all that was humiliating, in her position roseividly to her mind. "They, the French, would settle in this house: M.e General Rameau would occupy Prince Andrew's study and amuse himselfy looking through and reading his letters and papers. Mademoiselleourienne would do the honors of Bogucharovo for him. I should beiven a small room as a favor, the soldiers would violate myather's newly dug grave to steal his crosses and stars, they wouldell me of their victories over the Russians, and would pretend toympathize with my sorrow..." thought Princess Mary, not thinkinger own thoughts but feeling bound to think like her father and herrother. For herself she did not care where she remained or whatappened to her, but she felt herself the representative of her deadather and of Prince Andrew. Involuntarily she thought theirhoughts and felt their feelings. What they would have said and whathey would have done she felt bound to say and do. She went intorince Andrew's study, trying to enter completely into his ideas,nd considered her position.
	The demands of life, which had seemed to her annihilated by herather's death, all at once rose before her with a new, previouslynknown force and took possession of her.
	Agitated and flushed she paced the room, sending now for Michaelvanovich and now for Tikhon or Dron. Dunyasha, the nurse, and thether maids could not say in how far Mademoiselle Bourienne'statement was correct. Alpatych was not at home, he had gone to theolice. Neither could the architect Michael Ivanovich, who on beingent for came in with sleepy eyes, tell Princess Mary anything. Withust the same smile of agreement with which for fifteen years he hadeen accustomed to answer the old prince without expressing views ofis own, he now replied to Princess Mary, so that nothing definiteould be got from his answers. The old valet Tikhon, with sunken,maciated face that bore the stamp of inconsolable grief, replied:Yes, Princess" to all Princess Mary's questions and hardlyefrained from sobbing as he looked at her.
	At length Dron, the village Elder, entered the room and with aeep bow to Princess Mary came to a halt by the doorpost.
	Princess Mary walked up and down the room and stopped in front ofim.
	"Dronushka," she said, regarding as a sure friend this Dronushka wholways used to bring a special kind of gingerbread from his visit tohe fair at Vyazma every year and smilingly offer it to her,Dronushka, now since our misfortune..." she began, but could not gon.
	"We are all in God's hands," said he, with a sigh.
	They were silent for a while.
	"Dronushka, Alpatych has gone off somewhere and I have no one tourn to. Is true, as they tell me, that I can't even go away?"
	"Why shouldn't you go away, your excellency? You can go," said Dron.
	"I was told it would be dangerous because of the enemy. Dear friend, can do nothing. I understand nothing. I have nobody! I want to goway tonight or early tomorrow morning."
	Dron paused. He looked askance at Princess Mary and said: "There areo horses; I told Yakov Alpatych so."
	"Why are there none?" asked the princess.
	"It's all God's scourge," said Dron. "What horses we had have beenaken for the army or have died- this is such a year! It's not aase of feeding horses- we may die of hunger ourselves! As it is, someo three days without eating. We've nothing, we've been ruined."
	Princess Mary listened attentively to what he told her.
	"The peasants are ruined? They have no bread?" she asked.
	"They're dying of hunger," said Dron. "It's not a case of carting."
	"But why didn't you tell me, Dronushka? Isn't it possible to helphem? I'll do all I can...."
	To Princess Mary it was strange that now, at a moment when suchorrow was filling her soul, there could be rich people and poor,nd the rich could refrain from helping the poor. She had heardaguely that there was such a thing as "landlord's corn" which wasometimes given to the peasants. She also knew that neither her fatheror her brother would refuse to help the peasants in need, she onlyeared to make some mistake in speaking about the distribution ofhe grain she wished to give. She was glad such cares presentedhemselves, enabling her without scruple to forget her own grief.he began asking Dron about the peasants' needs and what there wasn Bogucharovo that belonged to the landlord.
	"But we have grain belonging to my brother?" she said.
	"The landlord's grain is all safe," replied Dron proudly. "Ourrince did not order it to be sold."
	"Give it to the peasants, let them have all they need; I give youeave in my brother's name," said she.
	Dron made no answer but sighed deeply.
	"Give them that corn if there is enough of it. Distribute it all. give this order in my brother's name; and tell them that what isurs is theirs. We do not grudge them anything. Tell them so."
	" Dron looked intently at the princess while she was speaking.
	"Discharge me, little mother, for God's sake! Order the keys to beaken from me," said he. "I have served twenty-three years and haveone no wrong. Discharge me, for God's sake!"
	Princess Mary did not understand what he wanted of her or why he wassking to be discharged. She replied that she had never doubted hisevotion and that she was ready to do anything for him and for theeasants.BK10|CH11
	CHAPTER XI
	An hour later Dunyasha came to tell the princess that Dron had come,nd all the peasants had assembled at the barn by the princess'rder and wished to have word with their mistress.
	"But I never told them to come," said Princess Mary. "I only toldron to let them have the grain."
	"Only, for God's sake, Princess dear, have them sent away andon't go out to them. It's all a trick," said Dunyasha, "and whenakov Alpatych returns let us get away... and please don't..."
	"What is a trick?" asked Princess Mary in surprise.
	"I know it is, only listen to me for God's sake! Ask nurse too. Theyay they don't agree to leave Bogucharovo as you ordered."
	"You're making some mistake. I never ordered them to go away,"aid Princess Mary. "Call Dronushka."
	Dron came and confirmed Dunyasha's words; the peasants had come byhe princess' order.
	"But I never sent for them," declared the princess. "You must haveiven my message wrong. I only said that you were to give them therain."
	Dron only sighed in reply.
	"If you order it they will go away," said he.
	"No, no. I'll go out to them," said Princess Mary, and in spite ofhe nurse's and Dunyasha's protests she went out into the porch; Dron,unyasha, the nurse, and Michael Ivanovich following her.
	"They probably think I am offering them the grain to bribe them toemain here, while I myself go away leaving them to the mercy of therench," thought Princess Mary. "I will offer them monthly rations andousing at our Moscow estate. I am sure Andrew would do even more iny place," she thought as she went out in the twilight toward therowd standing on the pasture by the barn.
	The men crowded closer together, stirred, and rapidly took off theirats. Princess Mary lowered her eyes and, tripping over her skirt,ame close up to them. So many different eyes, old and young, wereixed on her, and there were so many different faces, that she couldot distinguish any of them and, feeling that she must speak to themll at once, did not know how to do it. But again the sense that sheepresented her father and her brother gave her courage, and sheoldly began her speech.
	"I am very glad you have come," she said without raising her eyes,nd feeling her heart beating quickly and violently. "Dronushkaells me that the war has ruined you. That is our common misfortune,nd I shall grudge nothing to help you. I am myself going away becauset is dangerous here... the enemy is near... because... I am givingou everything, my friends, and I beg you to take everything, allur grain, so that you may not suffer want! And if you have beenold that I am giving you the grain to keep you here- that is notrue. On the contrary, I ask you to go with all your belongings to ourstate near Moscow, and I promise you I will see to it that thereou shall want for nothing. You shall be given food and lodging."
	The princess stopped. Sighs were the only sound heard in the crowd.
	"I am not doing this on my own account," she continued, "I do itn the name of my dead father, who was a good master to you, and of myrother and his son."
	Again she paused. No one broke the silence.
	"Ours is a common misfortune and we will share it together. All thats mine is yours," she concluded, scanning the faces before her.
	All eyes were gazing at her with one and the same expression. Sheould not fathom whether it was curiosity, devotion, gratitude, orpprehension and distrust- but the expression on all the faces wasdentical.
	"We are all very thankful for your bounty, but it won't do for us toake the landlord's grain," said a voice at the back of the crowd.
	"But why not?" asked the princess.
	No one replied and Princess Mary, looking round at the crowd,ound that every eye she met now was immediately dropped.
	"But why don't you want to take it?" she asked again.
	No one answered.
	The silence began to oppress the princess and she tried to catchomeone's eye.
	"Why don't you speak?" she inquired of a very old man who stood justn front of her leaning on his stick. "If you think something mores wanted, tell me! I will do anything," said she, catching his eye.
	But as if this angered him, he bent his head quite low and muttered:
	"Why should we agree? We don't want the grain."
	"Why should we give up everything? We don't agree. Don't agree....e are sorry for you, but we're not willing. Go away yourself,lone..." came from various sides of the crowd.
	And again all the faces in that crowd bore an identicalxpression, though now it was certainly not an expression of curiosityr gratitude, but of angry resolve.
	"But you can't have understood me," said Princess Mary with a sadmile. "Why don't you want to go? I promise to house and feed you,hile here the enemy would ruin you..."
	But her voice was drowned by the voices of the crowd.
	"We're not willing. Let them ruin us! We won't take your grain. Weon't agree."
	Again Princess Mary tried to catch someone's eye, but not a singleye in the crowd was turned to her; evidently they were all tryingo avoid her look. She felt strange and awkward.
	"Oh yes, an artful tale! Follow her into slavery! Pull down yourouses and go into bondage! I dare say! 'I'll give you grain, indeed!'he says," voices in the crowd were heard saying.
	With drooping head Princess Mary left the crowd and went back to theouse. Having repeated her order to Dron to have horses ready forer departure next morning, she went to her room and remained aloneith her own thoughts.BK10|CH12
	CHAPTER XII
	For a long time that night Princess Mary sat by the open window ofer room hearing the sound of the peasants' voices that reached herrom the village, but it was not of them she was thinking. She felthat she could not understand them however much she might thinkbout them. She thought only of one thing, her sorrow, which, afterhe break caused by cares for the present, seemed already to belong tohe past. Now she could remember it and weep or pray.
	After sunset the wind had dropped. The night was calm and fresh.oward midnight the voices began to subside, a cock crowed, the fulloon began to show from behind the lime trees, a fresh white dewy mistegan to rise, and stillness reigned over the village and the house.
	Pictures of the near past- her father's illness and last moments-ose one after another to her memory. With mournful pleasure she nowingered over these images, repelling with horror only the last one,he picture of his death, which she felt she could not contemplateven in imagination at this still and mystic hour of night. Andhese pictures presented themselves to her so clearly and in suchetail that they seemed now present, now past, and now future.
	She vividly recalled the moment when he had his first stroke and waseing dragged along by his armpits through the garden at Bald Hills,uttering something with his helpless tongue, twitching his grayyebrows and looking uneasily and timidly at her.
	"Even then he wanted to tell me what he told me the day he died,"he thought. "He had always thought what he said then." And sheecalled in all its detail the night at Bald Hills before he had theast stroke, when with a foreboding of disaster she had remained atome against his will. She had not slept and had stolen downstairsn tiptoe, and going to the door of the conservatory where he slepthat night had listened at the door. In a suffering and weary voice heas saying something to Tikhon, speaking of the Crimea and its warmights and of the Empress. Evidently he had wanted to talk. "And whyidn't he call me? Why didn't he let me be there instead of Tikhon?"rincess Mary had thought and thought again now. "Now he will neverell anyone what he had in his soul. Never will that moment return forim or for me when he might have said all he longed to say, and notikhon but I might have heard and understood him. Why didn't I enterhe room?" she thought. "Perhaps he would then have said to me what heaid the day he died. While talking to Tikhon he asked about me twice.e wanted to see me, and I was standing close by, outside the door. Itas sad and painful for him to talk to Tikhon who did not understandim. I remember how he began speaking to him about Lise as if she werelive- he had forgotten she was dead- and Tikhon reminded him that sheas no more, and he shouted, 'Fool!' He was greatly depressed. Fromehind the door I heard how he lay down on his bed groaning and loudlyxclaimed, 'My God!' Why didn't I go in then? What could he haveone to me? What could I have lost? And perhaps he would then haveeen comforted and would have said that word to me." And Princess Maryttered aloud the caressing word he had said to her on the day ofis death. "Dear-est!" she repeated, and began sobbing, with tearshat relieved her soul. She now saw his face before her. And not theace she had known ever since she could remember and had always seent a distance, but the timid, feeble face she had seen for the firstime quite closely, with all its wrinkles and details, when shetooped near to his mouth to catch what he said.
	"Dear-est!" she repeated again.
	"What was he thinking when he uttered that word? What is he thinkingow?" This question suddenly presented itself to her, and in answerhe saw him before her with the expression that was on his face ase lay in his coffin with his chin bound up with a white handkerchief.nd the horror that had seized her when she touched him andonvinced herself that that was not he, but something mysterious andorrible, seized her again. She tried to think of something else ando pray, but could do neither. With wide-open eyes she gazed at theoonlight and the shadows, expecting every moment to see his deadace, and she felt that the silence brooding over the house and withint held her fast.
	"Dunyasha," she whispered. "Dunyasha!" she screamed wildly, andearing herself out of this silence she ran to the servants'uarters to meet her old nurse and the maidservants who came runningoward her.BK10|CH13
	CHAPTER XIII
	On the seventeenth of August Rostov and Ilyin, accompanied byavrushka who had just returned from captivity and by an hussarrderly, left their quarters at Yankovo, ten miles from Bogucharovo,nd went for a ride- to try a new horse Ilyin had bought and to findut whether there was any hay to be had in the villages.
	For the last three days Bogucharovo had lain between the two hostilermies, so that it was as easy for the Russian rearguard to get tot as for the French vanguard; Rostov, as a careful squadronommander, wished to take such provisions as remained at Bogucharovoefore the French could get them.
	Rostov and Ilyin were in the merriest of moods. On the way toogucharovo, a princely estate with a dwelling house and farm wherehey hoped to find many domestic serfs and pretty girls, theyuestioned Lavrushka about Napoleon and laughed at his stories, andaced one another to try Ilyin's horse.
	Rostov had no idea that the village he was entering was the propertyf that very Bolkonski who had been engaged to his sister.
	Rostov and Ilyin gave rein to their horses for a last race along thencline before reaching Bogucharovo, and Rostov, outstripping Ilyin,as the first to gallop into the village street.
	"You're first!" cried Ilyin, flushed.
	"Yes, always first both on the grassland and here," answered Rostov,troking his heated Donets horse.
	"And I'd have won on my Frenchy, your excellency," said Lavrushkarom behind, alluding to his shabby cart horse, "only I didn't wish toortify you.
	They rode at a footpace to the barn, where a large crowd of peasantsas standing.
	Some of the men bared their heads, others stared at the new arrivalsithout doffing their caps. Two tall old peasants with wrinkledaces and scanty beards emerged from the tavern, smiling,taggering, and singing some incoherent song, and approached thefficers.
	"Fine fellows!" said Rostov laughing. "Is there any hay here?"
	"And how like one another," said Ilyin.
	"A mo-o-st me-r-r-y co-o-m-pa...!" sang one of the peasants with alissful smile.
	One of the men came out of the crowd and went up to Rostov.
	"Who do you belong to?" he asked.
	"The French," replied Ilyin jestingly, "and here is Napoleonimself"- and he pointed to Lavrushka.
	"Then you are Russians?" the peasant asked again.
	"And is there a large force of you here?" said another, a short man,oming up.
	"Very large," answered Rostov. "But why have you collected here?" hedded. "Is it a holiday?"
	"The old men have met to talk over the business of the commune,"eplied the peasant, moving away.
	At that moment, on the road leading from the big house, two womennd a man in a white hat were seen coming toward the officers.
	"The one in pink is mine, so keep off!" said Ilyin on seeingunyasha running resolutely toward him.
	"She'll be ours!" said Lavrushka to Ilyin, winking.
	"What do you want, my pretty?" said Ilyin with a smile.
	"The princess ordered me to ask your regiment and your name."
	"This is Count Rostov, squadron commander, and I am your humbleervant."
	"Co-o-om-pa-ny!" roared the tipsy peasant with a beatific smile ase looked at Ilyin talking to the girl. Following Dunyasha, Alpatychdvanced to Rostov, having bared his head while still at a distance.
	"May I make bold to trouble your honor?" said he respectfully, butith a shade of contempt for the youthfulness of this officer and with hand thrust into his bosom. "My mistress, daughter of General inhief Prince Nicholas Bolkonski who died on the fifteenth of thisonth, finding herself in difficulties owing to the boorishness ofhese people"- he pointed to the peasants- "asks you to come up to theouse.... Won't you, please, ride on a little farther," saidlpatych with a melancholy smile, "as it is not convenient in theresence of...?" He pointed to the two peasants who kept as close toim as horseflies to a horse.
	"Ah!... Alpatych... Ah, Yakov Alpatych... Grand! Forgive us forhrist's sake, eh?" said the peasants, smiling joyfully at him.
	Rostov looked at the tipsy peasants and smiled.
	"Or perhaps they amuse your honor?" remarked Alpatych with a staidir, as he pointed at the old men with his free hand.
	"No, there's not much to be amused at here," said Rostov, and roden a little way. "What's the matter?" he asked.
	"I make bold to inform your honor that the rude peasants hereon't wish to let the mistress leave the estate, and threaten tonharness her horses, so that though everything has been packed upince morning, her excellency cannot get away."
	"Impossible!" exclaimed Rostov.
	"I have the honor to report to you the actual truth," said Alpatych.
	Rostov dismounted, gave his horse to the orderly, and followedlpatych to the house, questioning him as to the state of affairs.t appeared that the princess' offer of corn to the peasants therevious day, and her talk with Dron and at the meeting, hadctually had so bad an effect that Dron had finally given up theeys and joined the peasants and had not appeared when Alpatych sentor him; and that in the morning when the princess gave orders toarness for her journey, the peasants had come in a large crowd to thearn and sent word that they would not let her leave the village: thathere was an order not to move, and that they would unharness theorses. Alpatych had gone out to admonish them, but was told (it washiefly Karp who did the talking, Dron not showing himself in therowd) that they could not let the princess go, that there was anrder to the contrary, but that if she stayed they would serve hers before and obey her in everything.
	At the moment when Rostov and Ilyin were galloping along the road,rincess Mary, despite the dissuasions of Alpatych, her nurse, and theaids, had given orders to harness and intended to start, but when theavalrymen were espied they were taken for Frenchmen, the coachman ranway, and the women in the house began to wail.
	"Father! Benefactor! God has sent you!" exclaimed deeply movedoices as Rostov passed through the anteroom.
	Princess Mary was sitting helpless and bewildered in the largeitting room, when Rostov was shown in. She could not grasp who he wasnd why he had come, or what was happening to her. When she saw hisussian face, and by his walk and the first words he utteredecognized him as a man of her own class, she glanced at him wither deep radiant look and began speaking in a voice that falterednd trembled with emotion. This meeting immediately struck Rostov as aomantic event. "A helpless girl overwhelmed with grief, left to theercy of coarse, rioting peasants! And what a strange fate sent meere! What gentleness and nobility there are in her features andxpression!" thought he as he looked at her and listened to herimid story.
	When she began to tell him that all this had happened the dayfter her father's funeral, her voiced trembled. She turned away,nd then, as if fearing he might take her words as meant to move himo pity, looked at him with an apprehensive glance of inquiry. Thereere tears in Rostov's eyes. Princess Mary noticed this and glancedratefully at him with that radiant look which caused the plainness ofer face to be forgotten.
	"I cannot express, Princess, how glad I am that I happened to rideere and am able to show my readiness to serve you," said Rostov,ising. "Go when you please, and I give you my word of honor that none shall dare to cause you annoyance if only you will allow me to acts your escort." And bowing respectfully, as if to a lady of royallood, he moved toward the door.
	Rostov's deferential tone seemed to indicate that though he wouldonsider himself happy to be acquainted with her, he did not wish toake advantage of her misfortunes to intrude upon her.
	Princess Mary understood this and appreciated his delicacy.
	"I am very, very grateful to you," she said in French, "but I hopet was all a misunderstanding and that no one is to blame for it." Sheuddenly began to cry.
	"Excuse me!" she said.
	Rostov, knitting his brows, left the room with another low bow.BK10|CH14
	CHAPTER XIV
	Well, is she pretty? Ah, friend- my pink one is delicious; herame is Dunyasha...."
	But on glancing at Rostov's face Ilyin stopped short. He saw thatis hero and commander was following quite a different train ofhought.
	Rostov glanced angrily at Ilyin and without replying strode off withapid steps to the village.
	"I'll show them; I'll give it to them, the brigands!" said he toimself.
	Alpatych at a gliding trot, only just managing not to run, kept upith him with difficulty.
	"What decision have you been pleased to come to?" said he.
	Rostov stopped and, clenching his fists, suddenly and sternly turnedn Alpatych.
	"Decision? What decision? Old dotard!..." cried he. "What have youeen about? Eh? The peasants are rioting, and you can't manage them?ou're a traitor youself! I know you. I'll flay you all alive!..." Ands if afraid of wasting his store of anger, he left Alpatych andent rapidly forward. Alpatych, mastering his offended feelings,ept pace with Rostov at a gliding gait and continued to impart hisiews. He said the peasants were obdurate and that at the presentoment it would be imprudent to "overresist" them without an armedorce, and would it not be better first to send for the military?
	"I'll give them armed force... I'll 'overresist' them!" utteredostov meaninglessly, breathless with irrational animal fury and theeed to vent it.
	Without considering what he would do he moved unconciously withuick, resolute steps toward the crowd. And the nearer he drew to ithe more Alpatych felt that this unreasonable action might produceood results. The peasants in the crowd were similarly impressedhen they saw Rostov's rapid, firm steps and resolute, frowning face.
	After the hussars had come to the village and Rostov had gone to seehe princess, a certain confusion and dissension had arisen amonghe crowd. Some of the peasants said that these new arrivals wereussians and might take it amiss that the mistress was being detained.ron was of this opinion, but as soon as he expressed it Karp andthers attacked their ex-Elder.
	"How many years have you been fattening on the commune?" Karphouted at him. "It's all one to you! You'll dig up your pot ofoney and take it away with you.... What does it matter to you whetherur homes are ruined or not?"
	"We've been told to keep order, and that no one is to leave theiromes or take away a single grain, and that's all about it!" criednother.
	"It was your son's turn to be conscripted, but no fear! Youegrudged your lump of a son," a little old man suddenly beganttacking Dron- "and so they took my Vanka to be shaved for a soldier!ut we all have to die."
	"To be sure, we all have to die. I'm not against the commune,"aid Dron.
	"That's it- not against it! You've filled your belly...."
	The two tall peasants had their say. As soon as Rostov, followedy Ilyin, Lavrushka, and Alpatych, came up to the crowd, Karp,hrusting his fingers into his belt and smiling a little, walked tohe front. Dron on the contrary retired to the rear and the crowd drewloser together.
	"Who is your Elder here? Hey?" shouted Rostov, coming up to therowd with quick steps.
	"The Elder? What do you want with him?..." asked Karp.
	But before the words were well out of his mouth, his cap flew offnd a fierce blow jerked his head to one side.
	"Caps off, traitors!" shouted Rostov in a wrathful voice. "Where'she Elder?" he cried furiously.
	"The Elder.... He wants the Elder!... Dron Zakharych, you!" meek andlustered voices here and there were heard calling and caps began toome off their heads.
	"We don't riot, we're following the orders," declared Karp, and athat moment several voices began speaking together.
	"It's as the old men have decided- there's too many of you givingrders."
	"Arguing? Mutiny!... Brigands! Traitors!" cried Rostov unmeaninglyn a voice not his own, gripping Karp by the collar. "Bind him, bindim!" he shouted, though there was no one to bind him but Lavrushkand Alpatych.
	Lavrushka, however, ran up to Karp and seized him by the arms fromehind.
	"Shall I call up our men from beyond the hill?" he called out.
	Alpatych turned to the peasants and ordered two of them by name toome and bind Karp. The men obediently came out of the crowd and beganaking off their belts.
	"Where's the Elder?" demanded Rostov in a loud voice.
	With a pale and frowning face Dron stepped out of the crowd.
	"Are you the Elder? Bind him, Lavrushka!" shouted Rostov, as if thatrder, too, could not possibly meet with any opposition.
	And in fact two more peasants began binding Dron, who took off hiswn belt and handed it to them, as if to aid them.
	"And you all listen to me!" said Rostov to the peasants. "Be offo your houses at once, and don't let one of your voices be heard!"
	"Why, we've not done any harm! We did it just out of foolishness.t's all nonsense... I said then that it was not in order," voicesere heard bickering with one another.
	"There! What did I say?" said Alpatych, coming into his own again.It's wrong, lads!"
	 "All our stupidity, Yakov Alpatych," came the answers, and therowd began at once to disperse through the village.
	The two bound men were led off to the master's house. The tworunken peasants followed them.
	"Aye, when I look at you!..." said one of them to Karp.
	"How can one talk to the masters like that? What were you thinkingf, you fool?" added the other- "A real fool!"
	Two hours later the carts were standing in the courtyard of theogucharovo house. The peasants were briskly carrying out theroprietor's goods and packing them on the carts, and Dron,iberated at Princess Mary's wish from the cupboard where he hadeen confined, was standing in the yard directing the men.
	"Don't put it in so carelessly," said one of the peasants, a manith a round smiling face, taking a casket from a housemaid. "You knowt has cost money! How can you chuck it in like that or shove it underhe cord where it'll get rubbed? I don't like that way of doinghings. Let it all be done properly, according to rule. Look here, putt under the bast matting and cover it with hay- that's the way!"
	"Eh, books, books!" said another peasant, bringing out Princendrew's library cupboards. "Don't catch up against it! It's heavy,ads- solid books."
	"Yes, they worked all day and didn't play!" remarked the tall,ound-faced peasant gravely, pointing with a significant wink at theictionaries that were on the top.
	Unwilling to obtrude himself on the princess, Rostov did not go backo the house but remained in the village awaiting her departure.hen her carriage drove out of the house, he mounted and accompanieder eight miles from Bogucharovo to where the road was occupied by ourroops. At the inn at Yankovo he respectfully took leave of her, forhe first time permitting himself to kiss her hand.
	"How can you speak so!" he blushingly replied to Princess Mary'sxpressions of gratitude for her deliverance, as she termed what hadccurred. "Any police officer would have done as much! If we had hadnly peasants to fight, we should not have let the enemy come so far,"aid he with a sense of shame and wishing to change the subject. "I amnly happy to have had the opportunity of making your acquaintance.ood-by, Princess. I wish you happiness and consolation and hope toeet you again in happier circumstances. If you don't want to makee blush, please don't thank me!"
	But the princess, if she did not again thank him in words, thankedim with the whole expression of her face, radiant with gratitudend tenderness. She could not believe that there was nothing tohank him for. On the contrary, it seemed to her certain that had heot been there she would have perished at the hands of the mutineersnd of the French, and that he had exposed himself to terrible andbvious danger to save her, and even more certain was it that he was aan of lofty and noble soul, able to understand her position and herorrow. His kind, honest eyes, with the tears rising in them whenhe herself had begun to cry as she spoke of her loss, did leave heremory.
	When she had taken leave of him and remained alone she suddenly felter eyes filling with tears, and then not for the first time thetrange question presented itself to her: did she love him?
	On the rest of the way to Moscow, though the princess' positionas not a cheerful one, Dunyasha, who went with her in the carriage,ore than once noticed that her mistress leaned out of the windownd smiled at something with an expression of mingled joy and sorrow.
	"Well, supposing I do love him?" thought Princess Mary.
	Ashamed as she was of acknowledging to herself that she had fallenn love with a man who would perhaps never love her, she comfortederself with the thought that no one would ever know it and that sheould not be to blame if, without ever speaking of it to anyone, sheontinued to the end of her life to love the man with whom she hadallen in love for the first and last time in her life.
	Sometimes when she recalled his looks, his sympathy, and hisords, happiness did not appear impossible to her. It was at thoseoments that Dunyasha noticed her smiling as she looked out of thearriage window.
	"Was it not fate that brought him to Bogucharovo, and at that veryoment?" thought Princess Mary. "And that caused his sister toefuse my brother?" And in all this Princess Mary saw the hand ofrovidence.
	The impression the princess made on Rostov was a very agreeable one.o remember her gave him pleasure, and when his comrades, hearing ofis adventure at Bogucharovo, rallied him on having gone to look foray and having picked up one of the wealthiest heiresses in Russia, herew angry. It made him angry just because the idea of marrying theentle Princess Mary, who was attractive to him and had an enormousortune, had against his will more than once entered his head. Forimself personally Nicholas could not wish for a better wife: byarrying her he would make the countess his mother happy, would beble to put his father's affairs in order, and would even- he felt it-nsure Princess Mary's happiness.
	But Sonya? And his plighted word? That was why Rostov grew angryhen he was rallied about Princess Bolkonskaya.BK10|CH15
	CHAPTER XV
	On receiving command of the armies Kutuzov remembered Princendrew and sent an order for him to report at headquarters.
	Prince Andrew arrived at Tsarevo-Zaymishche on the very day and athe very hour that Kutuzov was reviewing the troops for the firstime. He stopped in the village at the priest's house in front ofhich stood the commander in chief's carriage, and he sat down onhe bench at the gate awaiting his Serene Highness, as everyone nowalled Kutuzov. From the field beyond the village came now sounds ofegimental music and now the roar of many voices shouting "Hurrah!" tohe new commander in chief. Two orderlies, a courier and a major-domo,tood near by, some ten paces from Prince Andrew, availinghemselves of Kutuzov's absence and of the fine weather. A short,warthy lieutenant colonel of hussars with thick mustaches andhiskers rode up to the gate and, glancing at Prince Andrew,nquired whether his Serene Highness was putting up there andhether he would soon be back.
	Prince Andrew replied that he was not on his Serene Highness'taff but was himself a new arrival. The lieutenant colonel turnedo a smart orderly, who, with the peculiar contempt with which aommander in chief's orderly speaks to officers, replied:
	"What? His Serene Highness? I expect he'll be here soon. What do youant?"
	The lieutenant colonel of hussars smiled beneath his mustache at therderly's tone, dismounted, gave his horse to a dispatch runner, andpproached Bolkonski with a slight bow. Bolkonski made room for him onhe bench and the lieutenant colonel sat down beside him.
	"You're also waiting for the commander in chief?" said he. "They saye weceives evewyone, thank God!... It's awful with those sausageaters! Ermolov had weason to ask to be pwomoted to be a German! Now'waps Wussians will get a look in. As it was, devil only knows whatas happening. We kept wetweating and wetweating. Did you take part inhe campaign?" he asked.
	"I had the pleasure," replied Prince Andrew, "not only of takingart in the retreat but of losing in that retreat all I held dear- noto mention the estate and home of my birth- my father, who died ofrief. I belong to the province of Smolensk."
	"Ah? You're Pwince Bolkonski? Vewy glad to make your acquaintance!'m Lieutenant Colonel Denisov, better known as 'Vaska,'" saidenisov, pressing Prince Andrew's hand and looking into his faceith a particularly kindly attention. "Yes, I heard," said heympathetically, and after a short pause added: "Yes, it's Scythianarfare. It's all vewy well- only not for those who get it in theeck. So you are Pwince Andwew Bolkonski?" He swayed his head. "Vewyleased, Pwince, to make your acquaintance!" he repeated again,miling sadly, and he again pressed Prince Andrew's hand.
	Prince Andrew knew Denisov from what Natasha had told him of herirst suitor. This memory carried him sadly and sweetly back tohose painful feelings of which he had not thought lately, but whichtill found place in his soul. Of late he had received so many new andery serious impressions- such as the retreat from Smolensk, his visito Bald Hills, and the recent news of his father's death- and hadxperienced so many emotions, that for a long time past those memoriesad not entered his mind, and now that they did, they did not act onim with nearly their former strength. For Denisov, too, theemories awakened by the name of Bolkonski belonged to a distant,omantic past, when after supper and after Natasha's singing he hadroposed to a little girl of fifteen without realizing what he wasoing. He smiled at the recollection of that time and of his loveor Natasha, and passed at once to what now interested himassionately and exclusively. This was a plan of campaign he hadevised while serving at the outposts during the retreat. He hadroposed that plan to Barclay de Tolly and now wished to propose it toutuzov. The plan was based on the fact that the French line ofperation was to extended, and it proposed that instead of, oroncurrently with, action on the front to bar the advance of therench, we should attack their line of communication. He beganxplaining his plan to Prince Andrew.
	"They can't hold all that line. It's impossible. I will undertake toweak thwough. Give me five hundwed men and I will bweak the line,hat's certain! There's only one way- guewilla warfare!"
	Denisov rose and began gesticulating as he explained his plan toolkonski. In the midst of his explanation shouts were heard fromhe army, growing more incoherent and more diffused, mingling withusic and songs and coming from the field where the review was held.ounds of hoofs and shouts were nearing the village.
	"He's coming! He's coming!" shouted a Cossack standing at the gate.
	Bolkonski and Denisov moved to the gate, at which a knot of soldiersa guard of honor) was standing, and they saw Kutuzov coming downhe street mounted on a rather small sorrel horse. A huge suite ofenerals rode behind him. Barclay was riding almost beside him, and crowd of officers ran after and around them shouting, "Hurrah!"
	His adjutants galloped into the yard before him. Kutuzov wasmpatiently urging on his horse, which ambled smoothly under hiseight, and he raised his hand to his white Horse Guard's cap with aed band and no peak, nodding his head continually. When he came up tohe guard of honor, a fine set of Grenadiers mostly wearingecorations, who were giving him the salute, he looked at themilently and attentively for nearly a minute with the steady gaze of aommander and then turned to the crowd of generals and officersurrounding him. Suddenly his face assumed a subtle expression, hehrugged his shoulders with an air of perplexity.
	"And with such fine fellows to retreat and retreat! Well, good-by,eneral," he added, and rode into the yard past Prince Andrew andenisov.
	"Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah!" shouted those behind him.
	Since Prince Andrew had last seen him Kutuzov had grown still moreorpulent, flaccid, and fat. But the bleached eyeball, the scar, andhe familiar weariness of his expression were still the same. He wasearing the white Horse Guard's cap and a military overcoat with ahip hanging over his shoulder by a thin strap. He sat heavily andwayed limply on his brisk little horse.
	"Whew... whew... whew!" he whistled just audibly as he rode into theard. His face expressed the relief of relaxed strain felt by a manho means to rest after a ceremony. He drew his left foot out of thetirrup and, lurching with his whole body and puckering his faceith the effort, raised it with difficulty onto the saddle, leanedn his knee, groaned, and slipped down into the arms of the Cossacksnd adjutants who stood ready to assist him.
	He pulled himself together, looked round, screwing up his eyes,lanced at Prince Andrew, and, evidently not recognizing him, movedith his waddling gait to the porch. "Whew... whew... whew!" hehistled, and again glanced at Prince Andrew. As often occurs with olden, it was only after some seconds that the impression produced byrince Andrew's face linked itself up with Kutuzov's remembrance ofis personality.
	"Ah, how do you do, my dear prince? How do you do, my dear boy? Comelong..." said he, glancing wearily round, and he stepped onto theorch which creaked under his weight.
	He unbuttoned his coat and sat down on a bench in the porch.
	"And how's your father?"
	"I received news of his death, yesterday," replied Prince Andrewbruptly.
	Kutuzov looked at him with eyes wide open with dismay and thenook off his cap and crossed himself:
	"May the kingdom of Heaven be his! God's will be done to us all!" Heighed deeply, his whole chest heaving, and was silent for a while. "Ioved him and respected him, and sympathize with you with all myeart."
	He embraced Prince Andrew, pressing him to his fat breast, and forome time did not let him go. When he released him Prince Andrew sawhat Kutuzov's flabby lips were trembling and that tears were in hisyes. He sighed and pressed on the bench with both hands to raiseimself.
	"Come! Come with me, we'll have a talk," said he.
	But at that moment Denisov, no more intimidated by his superiorshan by the enemy, came with jingling spurs up the steps of the porch,espite the angry whispers of the adjutants who tried to stop him.utuzov, his hands still pressed on the seat, glanced at him glumly.enisov, having given his name, announced that he had to communicateo his Serene Highness a matter of great importance for theirountry's welfare. Kutuzov looked wearily at him and, lifting hisands with a gesture of annoyance, folded them across his stomach,epeating the words: "For our country's welfare? Well, what is it?peak!" Denisov blushed like a girl (it was strange to see the colorise in that shaggy, bibulous, time-worn face) and boldly began toxpound his plan of cutting the enemy's lines of communication betweenmolensk and Vyazma. Denisov came from those parts and knew theountry well. His plan seemed decidedly a good one, especially fromhe strength of conviction with which he spoke. Kutuzov looked down atis own legs, occasionally glancing at the door of the adjoining huts if expecting something unpleasant to emerge from it. And fromhat hut, while Denisov was speaking, a general with a portfolio underis arm really did appear.
	"What?" said Kutuzov, in the midst of Denisov's explanations, "areou ready so soon?"
	"Ready, your Serene Highness," replied the general.
	Kutuzov swayed his head, as much as to say: "How is one man toeal with it all?" and again listened to Denisov.
	"I give my word of honor as a Wussian officer," said Denisov,that I can bweak Napoleon's line of communication!"
	"What relation are you to Intendant General Kiril Andreevichenisov?" asked Kutuzov, interrupting him.
	"He is my uncle, your Sewene Highness."
	"Ah, we were friends," said Kutuzov cheerfully. "All right, allight, friend, stay here at the staff and tomorrow we'll have a talk."
	With a nod to Denisov he turned away and put out his hand for theapers Konovnitsyn had brought him.
	"Would not your Serene Highness like to come inside?" said theeneral on duty in a discontented voice, "the plans must be examinednd several papers have to be signed."
	An adjutant came out and announced that everything was ineadiness within. But Kutuzov evidently did not wish to enter thatoom till he was disengaged. He made a grimace...
	"No, tell them to bring a small table out here, my dear boy. I'llook at them here," said he. "Don't go away," he added, turning torince Andrew, who remained in the porch and listened to the general'seport.
	While this was being given, Prince Andrew heard the whisper of aoman's voice and the rustle of a silk dress behind the door.everal times on glancing that way he noticed behind that door alump, rosy, handsome woman in a pink dress with a lilac silk kerchiefn her head, holding a dish and evidently awaiting the entrance of theommander in chief. Kutiizov's adjutant whispered to Prince Andrewhat this was the wife of the priest whose home it was, and that shentended to offer his Serene Highness bread and salt. "Her husband haselcomed his Serene Highness with the cross at the church, and shentends to welcome him in the house.... She's very pretty," addedhe adjutant with a smile. At those words Kutuzov looked round. He wasistening to the general's report- which consisted chiefly of ariticism of the position at Tsarevo-Zaymishche- as he had listened toenisov, and seven years previously had listened to the discussiont the Austerlitz council of war. He evidently listened only becausee had ears which, though there was a piece of tow in one of them,ould not help hearing; but it was evident that nothing the generalould say would surprise or even interest him, that he knew all thatould be said beforehand, and heard it all only because he had to,s one has to listen to the chanting of a service of prayer. Allhat Denisov had said was clever and to the point. What the generalas saying was even more clever and to the point, but it was evidenthat Kutuzov despised knowledge and cleverness, and knew ofomething else that would decide the matter- something independentf clever. ness and knowledge. Prince Andrew watched the commandern chief's face attentively, and the only expression he could seehere was one of boredom, curiosity as to the meaning of theeminine whispering behind the door, and a desire to observeropriety. It was evident that Kutuzov despised cleverness andearning and even the patriotic feeling shown by Denisov, but despisedhem not because of his own intellect, feelings, or knowledge- heid not try to display any of these- but because of something else. Heespised them because of his old age and experience of life. Thenly instruction Kutuzov gave of his own accord during that reporteferred to looting by the Russian troops. At the end of the reporthe general put before him for signature a paper relating to theecovery of payment from army commanders for green oats mown down byhe soldiers, when landowners lodged petitions for compensation.
	After hearing the matter, Kutuzov smacked his lips together andhook his head.
	"Into the stove... into the fire with it! I tell you once for all,y dear fellow," said he, "into the fire with all such things! Lethem cut the crops and burn wood to their hearts' content. I don'trder it or allow it, but I don't exact compensation either. One can'tet on without it. 'When wood is chopped the chips will fly.'" Heooked at the paper again. "Oh, this German precision!" he muttered,haking his head.BK10|CH16
	CHAPTER XVI
	"Well, that's all!" said Kutuzov as he signed the last of theocuments, and rising heavily and smoothing out the folds in his fathite neck he moved toward the door with a more cheerful expression.
	The priest's wife, flushing rosy red, caught up the dish she hadfter all not managed to present at the right moment, though she hado long been preparing for it, and with a low bow offered it toutuzov.
	He screwed up his eyes, smiled, lifted her chin with his hand, andaid:
	"Ah, what a beauty! Thank you, sweetheart!"
	He took some gold pieces from his trouser pocket and put them on theish for her. "Well, my dear, and how are we getting on?" he asked,oving to the door of the room assigned to him. The priest's wifemiled, and with dimples in her rosy cheeks followed him into theoom. The adjutant came out to the porch and asked Prince Andrew tounch with him. Half an hour later Prince Andrew was again called toutuzov. He found him reclining in an armchair, still in the samenbuttoned overcoat. He had in his hand a French book which helosed as Prince Andrew entered, marking the place with a knife.rince Andrew saw by the cover that it was Les Chevaliers du Cygney Madame de Genlis.
	"Well, sit down, sit down here. Let's have a talk," said Kutuzov.It's sad, very sad. But remember, my dear fellow, that I am aather to you, a second father...."
	Prince Andrew told Kutuzov all he knew of his father's death, andhat he had seen at Bald Hills when he passed through it.
	"What... what they have brought us to!" Kutuzov suddenly cried in angitated voice, evidently picturing vividly to himself from Princendrew's story the condition Russia was in. "But give me time, give meime!" he said with a grim look, evidently not wishing to continuehis agitating conversation, and added: "I sent for you to keep youith me."
	"I thank your Serene Highness, but I fear I am longer fit for thetaff," replied Prince Andrew with a smile which Kutuzov noticed.
	Kutuzov glanced inquiringly at him.
	"But above all," added Prince Andrew, "I have grown used to myegiment, am fond of the officers, and I fancy the men also like me. Ihould be sorry to leave the regiment. If I decline the honor of beingith you, believe me..."
	A shrewd, kindly, yet subtly derisive expression lit up Kutuzov'sodgy face. He cut Bolkonski short.
	"I am sorry, for I need you. But you're right, you're right! It'sot here that men are needed. Advisers are always plentiful, but menre not. The regiments would not be what they are if the would-bedvisers served there as you do. I remember you at Austerlitz.... Iemember, yes, I remember you with the standard!" said Kutuzov, and flush of pleasure suffused Prince Andrew's face at thisecollection.
	Taking his hand and drawing him downwards, Kutuzov offered his cheeko be kissed, and again Prince Andrew noticed tears in the old man'syes. Though Prince Andrew knew that Kutuzov's tears came easily,nd that he was particularly tender to and considerate of him from aish to show sympathy with his loss, yet this reminder of Austerlitzas both pleasant and flattering to him.
	"Go your way and God be with you. I know your path is the path ofonor!" He paused. "I missed you at Bucharest, but I needed someone toend." And changing the subject, Kutuzov began to speak of the Turkishar and the peace that had been concluded. "Yes, I have been muchlamed," he said, "both for that war and the peace... but everythingame at the right time. Tout vient a point a celui qui sait attendre.*nd there were as many advisers there as here..." he went on,eturning to the subject of "advisers" which evidently occupied him.Ah, those advisers!" said he. "If we had listened to them all wehould not have made peace with Turkey and should not have beenhrough with that war. Everything in haste, but more haste, lesspeed. Kamenski would have been lost if he had not died. He stormedortresses with thirty thousand men. It is not difficult to capture fortress but it is difficult to win a campaign. For that, stormingnd attacking but patience and time are wanted. Kamenski sent soldierso Rustchuk, but I only employed these two things and took moreortresses than Kamenski and made the but eat horseflesh!" He swayedis head. "And the French shall too, believe me," he went on,rowing warmer and beating his chest, "I'll make them eat horseflesh!"nd tears again dimmed his eyes.
	*"Everything comes in time to him who knows how to wait."
	"But shan't we have to accept battle?" remarked Prince Andrew.
	"We shall if everybody wants it; it can't be helped.... Butelieve me, my dear boy, there is nothing stronger than those two:atience and time, they will do it all. But the advisers n'entendentas de cette oreille, voila le mal.* Some want a thing- otherson't. What's one to do?" he asked, evidently expecting an answer.Well, what do you want us to do?" he repeated and his eye shoneith a deep, shrewd look. "I'll tell you what to do," he continued, asrince Andrew still did not reply: "I will tell you what to do, andhat I do. Dans le doute, mon cher," he paused, "abstiens-toi"*[2]- herticulated the French proverb deliberately.
	*"Don't see it that way, that's the trouble."
	*[2] "When in doubt, my dear fellow, do nothing."
	"Well, good-by, my dear fellow; remember that with all my heart Ihare your sorrow, and that for you I am not a Serene Highness, nor prince, nor a commander in chief, but a father! If you want anythingome straight to me. Good-by, my dear boy."
	Again he embraced and kissed Prince Andrew, but before the latterad left the room Kutuzov gave a sigh of relief and went on with hisnfinished novel, Les Chevaliers du Cygne by Madame de Genlis.
	Prince Andrew could not have explained how or why it was, butfter that interview with Kutuzov he went back to his regimenteassured as to the general course of affairs and as to the man tohom it had been entrusted. The more he realized the absence of allersonal motive in that old man- in whom there seemed to remain onlyhe habit of passions, and in place of an intellect (grouping eventsnd drawing conclusions) only the capacity calmly to contemplate theourse of events- the more reassured he was that everything would bes it should. "He will not bring in any plan of his own. He will notevise or undertake anything," thought Prince Andrew, "but he willear everything, remember everything, and put everything in its place.e will not hinder anything useful nor allow anything harmful. Henderstands that there is something stronger and more important thanis own will- the inevitable course of events, and he can see them andrasp their significance, and seeing that significance can refrainrom meddling and renounce his personal wish directed to somethinglse. And above all," thought Prince Andrew, "one believes in himecause he's Russian, despite the novel by Genlis and the Frenchroverbs, and because his voice shook when he said: 'What they haverought us to!' and had a sob in it when he said he would 'make themat horseflesh!'"
	On such feelings, more or less dimly shared by all, the unanimitynd general approval were founded with which, despite courtnfluences, the popular choice of Kutuzov as commander in chief waseceived.BK10|CH17
	CHAPTER XVII
	After the Emperor had left Moscow, life flowed on there in its usualourse, and its course was so very usual that it was difficult toemember the recent days of patriotic elation and ardor, hard toelieve that Russia was really in danger and that the members of thenglish Club were also sons of the Fatherland ready to sacrificeverything for it. The one thing that recalled the patriotic fervorveryone had displayed during the Emperor's stay was the call forontributions of men and money, a necessity that as soon as theromises had been made assumed a legal, official form and becamenavoidable.
	With the enemy's approach to Moscow, the Moscovites' view of theirituation did not grow more serious but on the contrary became evenore frivolous, as always happens with people who see a great dangerpproaching. At the approach of danger there are always two voiceshat speak with equal power in the human soul: one very reasonablyells a man to consider the nature of the danger and the means ofscaping it; the other, still more reasonably, says that it is tooepressing and painful to think of the danger, since it is not inan's power to foresee everything and avert the general course ofvents, and it is therefore better to disregard what is painful tillt comes, and to think about what is pleasant. In solitude a manenerally listens to the first voice, but in society to the second. Sot was now with the inhabitants of Moscow. It was long since peoplead been as gay in Moscow as that year.
	Rostopchin's broadsheets, headed by woodcuts of a drink shop, aotman, and a Moscow burgher called Karpushka Chigirin, "who- havingeen a militiaman and having had rather too much at the pub- heardhat Napoleon wished to come to Moscow, grew angry, abused therench in very bad language, came out of the drink shop, and, underhe sign of the eagle, began to address the assembled people," wereead and discussed, together with the latest of Vasili Lvovichushkin's bouts rimes.
	In the corner room at the Club, members gathered to read theseroadsheets, and some liked the way Karpushka jeered at the French,aying: "They will swell up with Russian cabbage, burst with ouruckwheat porridge, and choke themselves with cabbage soup. They arell dwarfs and one peasant woman will toss three of them with aayfork." Others did not like that tone and said it was stupid andulgar. It was said that Rostopchin had expelled all Frenchmen andven all foreigners from Moscow, and that there had been some spiesnd agents of Napoleon among them; but this was told chiefly tontroduce Rostopchin's witty remark on that occasion. The foreignersere deported to Nizhni by boat, and Rostopchin had said to them inrench: "Rentrez en vousmemes; entrez dans la barque, et n'en faitesas une barque de Charon."* There was talk of all the governmentffices having been already removed from Moscow, and to thishinshin's witticism was added- that for that alone Moscow ought to berateful to Napoleon. It was said that Mamonov's regiment would costim eight hundred thousand rubles, and that Bezukhov had spent evenore on his, but that the best thing about Bezukhov's action washat he himself was going to don a uniform and ride at the head of hisegiment without charging anything for the show.
	*"Think it over; get into the barque, and take care not to make it aarque of Charon."
	"You don't spare anyone," said Julie Drubetskaya as she collectednd pressed together a bunch of raveled lint with her thin, beringedingers.
	Julie was preparing to leave Moscow next day and was giving aarewell soiree.
	"Bezukhov est ridicule, but he is so kind and good-natured. Whatleasure is there to be so caustique?"
	"A forfeit!" cried a young man in militia uniform whom Juliealled "mon chevalier," and who was going with her to Nizhni.
	In Julie's set, as in many other circles in Moscow, it had beengreed that they would speak nothing but Russian and that those whoade a slip and spoke French should pay fines to the Committee ofoluntary Contributions.
	"Another forfeit for a Gallicism," said a Russian writer who wasresent. "'What pleasure is there to be' is not Russian!"
	"You spare no one," continued Julie to the young man without heedinghe author's remark.
	"For caustique- I am guilty and will pay, and I am prepared to paygain for the pleasure of telling you the truth. For Gallicisms Ion't be responsible," she remarked, turning to the author: "I haveeither the money nor the time, like Prince Galitsyn, to engage aaster to teach me Russian!"
	"Ah, here he is!" she added. "Quand on... No, no," she said to theilitia officer, "you won't catch me. Speak of the sun and you see itsays!" and she smiled amiably at Pierre. "We were just talking ofou," she said with the facility in lying natural to a societyoman. "We were saying that your regiment would be sure to be betterhan Mamonov's."
	"Oh, don't talk to me of my regiment," replied Pierre, kissing hisostess' hand and taking a seat beside her. "I am so sick of it."
	"You will, of course, command it yourself?" said Julie, directing sly, sarcastic glance toward the militia officer.
	The latter in Pierre's presence had ceased to be caustic, and hisace expressed perplexity as to what Julie's smile might mean. Inpite of his absent-mindedness and good nature, Pierre's personalitymmediately checked any attempt to ridicule him to his face.
	"No," said Pierre, with a laughing glance at his big, stout body. "Ihould make too good a target for the French, besides I am afraid Ihould hardly be able to climb onto a horse."
	Among those whom Julie's guests happened to choose to gossip aboutere the Rostovs.
	"I hear that their affairs are in a very bad way," said Julie.And he is so unreasonable, the count himself I mean. Theazumovskis wanted to buy his house and his estate near Moscow, but itrags on and on. He asks too much."
	"No, I think the sale will come off in a few days," said someone.Though it is madness to buy anything in Moscow now."
	"Why?" asked Julie. "You don't think Moscow is in danger?"
	"Then why are you leaving?"
	"I? What a question! I am going because... well, because everyone isoing: and besides- I am not Joan of Arc or an Amazon."
	"Well, of course, of course! Let me have some more strips of linen."
	"If he manages the business properly he will be able to pay offll his debts," said the militia officer, speaking of Rostov.
	"A kindly old man but not up to much. And why do they stay on soong in Moscow? They meant to leave for the country long ago.atalie is quite well again now, isn't she?" Julie asked Pierre with anowing smile.
	"They are waiting for their younger son," Pierre replied. "He joinedbolenski's Cossacks and went to Belaya Tserkov where the regiments being formed. But now they have had him transferred to myegiment and are expecting him every day. The count wanted to leaveong ago, but the countess won't on any account leave Moscow tiller son returns."
	"I met them the day before yesterday at the Arkharovs'. Natalieas recovered her looks and is brighter. She sang a song. How easilyome people get over everything!"
	"Get over what?" inquired Pierre, looking displeased.
	Julie smiled.
	"You know, Count, such knights as you are only found in Madame deouza's novels."
	"What knights? What do you mean?" demanded Pierre, blushing.
	"Oh, come, my dear count! C'est la fable de tout Moscou. Je vousdmire, ma parole d'honneur!"*
	*"It is the talk of all Moscow. My word, I admire you!"
	"Forfeit, forfeit!" cried the militia officer.
	"All right, one can't talk- how tiresome!"
	"What is 'the talk of all Moscow'?" Pierre asked angrily, risingo his feet.
	"Come now, Count, you know!"
	"I don't know anything about it," said Pierre.
	"I know you were friendly with Natalie, and so... but I was alwaysore friendly with Vera- that dear Vera."
	"No, madame!" Pierre continued in a tone of displeasure, "I have notaken on myself the role of Natalie Rostova's knight at all, andave not been their house for nearly a month. But I cannotnderstand the cruelty..."
	"Qui s'excuse s'accuse,"* said Julie, smiling and waving the lintriumphantly, and to have the last word she promptly changed theubject. "Do you know what I heard today? Poor Mary Bolkonskayarrived in Moscow yesterday. Do you know that she has lost herather?"
	*"Who excuses himself, accuses himself."
	"Really? Where is she? I should like very much to see her," saidierre.
	"I spent the evening with her yesterday. She is going to theirstate near Moscow either today or tomorrow morning, with her nephew."
	"Well, and how is she?" asked Pierre.
	"She is well, but sad. But do you know who rescued her? It isuite a romance. Nicholas Rostov! She was surrounded, and theyanted to kill her and had wounded some of her people. He rushed innd saved her...."
	"Another romance," said the militia officer. "Really, this generallight has been arranged to get all the old maids married off. Catiches one and Princess Bolkonskaya another."
	"Do you know, I really believe she is un petit peu amoureuse dueune homme."*
	*"A little bit in love with the young man."
	"Forfeit, forfeit, forfeit!"
	"But how could one say that in Russian?"BK10|CH18
	CHAPTER XVIII
	When Pierre returned home he was handed two of Rostopchin'sroadsheets that had been brought that day.
	The first declared that the report that Count Rostopchin hadorbidden people to leave Moscow was false; on the contrary he waslad that ladies and tradesmen's wives were leaving the city. "Thereill be less panic and less gossip," ran the broadsheet "but I willtake my life on it that that will not enter Moscow." These wordshowed Pierre clearly for the first time that the French would enteroscow. The second broadsheet stated that our headquarters were atyazma, that Count Wittgenstein had defeated the French, but that asany of the inhabitants of Moscow wished to be armed, weapons wereeady for them at the arsenal: sabers, pistols, and muskets whichould be had at a low price. The tone of the proclamation was not asocose as in the former Chigirin talks. Pierre pondered over theseroadsheets. Evidently the terrible stormcloud he had desired with thehole strength of his soul but which yet aroused involuntary horror inim was drawing near.
	"Shall I join the army and enter the service, or wait?" he askedimself for the hundredth time. He took a pack of cards that lay onhe table and began to lay them out for a game of patience.
	"If this patience comes out," he said to himself after shuffling theards, holding them in his hand, and lifting his head, "if it comesut, it means... what does it mean?"
	He had not decided what it should mean when he heard the voice ofhe eldest princess at the door asking whether she might come in.
	"Then it will mean that I must go to the army," said Pierre toimself. "Come in, come in!" he added to the princess.
	Only the eldest princess, the one with the stony face and longaist, was still living in Pierre's house. The two younger ones hadoth married.
	"Excuse my coming to you, cousin," she said in a reproachful andgitated voice. "You know some decision must be come to. What is goingo happen? Everyone has left Moscow and the people are rioting. How ist that we are staying on?"
	"On the contrary, things seem satisfactory, ma cousine," said Pierren the bantering tone he habitually adopted toward her, always feelingncomfortable in the role of her benefactor.
	"Satisfactory, indeed! Very satisfactory! Barbara Ivanovna told meoday how our troops are distinguishing themselves. It certainlyoes them credit! And the people too are quite mutinous- they noonger obey, even my maid has taken to being rude. At this rate theyill soon begin beating us. One can't walk in the streets. But,bove all, the French will be here any day now, so what are we waitingor? I ask just one thing of you, cousin," she went on, "arrange fore to be taken to Petersburg. Whatever I may be, I can't live underonaparte's rule."
	"Oh, come, ma cousine! Where do you get your information from? Onhe contrary..."
	"I won't submit to your Napoleon! Others may if they please.... Ifou don't want to do this..."
	"But I will, I'll give the order at once."
	The princess was apparently vexed at not having anyone to be angryith. Muttering to herself, she sat down on a chair.
	"But you have been misinformed," said Pierre. "Everything is quietn the city and there is not the slightest danger. See! I've just beeneading..." He showed her the broadsheet. "Count Rostopchin writeshat he will stake his life on it that the enemy will not enteroscow."
	"Oh, that count of yours!" said the princess malevolently. "He is hypocrite, a rascal who has himself roused the people to riot.idn't he write in those idiotic broadsheets that anyone, 'whoevert might be, should be dragged to the lockup by his hair'? (Howilly!) 'And honor and glory to whoever captures him,' he says. Thiss what his cajolery has brought us to! Barbara Ivanovna told me theob near killed her because she said something in French."
	"Oh, but it's so... You take everything so to heart," said Pierre,nd began laying out his cards for patience.
	Although that patience did come out, Pierre did not join the army,ut remained in deserted Moscow ever in the same state of agitation,rresolution, and alarm, yet at the same time joyfully expectingomething terrible.
	Next day toward evening the princess set off, and Pierre's headteward came to inform him that the money needed for the equipmentf his regiment could not be found without selling one of the estates.n general the head steward made out to Pierre that his project ofaising a regiment would ruin him. Pierre listened to him, scarcelyble to repress a smile.
	"Well then, sell it," said he. "What's to be done? I can't draw backow!"
	The worse everything became, especially his own affairs, theetter was Pierre pleased and the more evident was it that theatastrophe he expected was approaching. Hardly anyone he knew waseft in town. Julie had gone, and so had Princess Mary. Of hisntimate friends only the Rostovs remained, but he did not go to seehem.
	To distract his thoughts he drove that day to the village oforontsovo to see the great balloon Leppich was constructing toestroy the foe, and a trial balloon that was to go up next day. Thealloon was not yet ready, but Pierre learned that it was beingonstructed by the Emperor's desire. The Emperor had written toount Rostopchin as follows:
	As soon as Leppich is ready, get together a crew of reliable andntelligent men for his car and send a courier to General Kutuzov toet him know. I have informed him of the matter.
	Please impress upon Leppich to be very careful where he descends forhe first time, that he may not make a mistake and fall into thenemy's hands. It is essential for him to combine his movements withhose of the commander in chief.
	On his way home from Vorontsovo, as he was passing the Bolotnoelace Pierre, seeing a large crowd round the Lobnoe Place, stopped andot out of his trap. A French cook accused of being a spy was beinglogged. The flogging was only just over, and the executioner waseleasing from the flogging bench a stout man with red whiskers, inlue stockings and a green jacket, who was moaning piteously.nother criminal, thin and pale, stood near. Judging by their faceshey were both Frenchmen. With a frightened and suffering lookesembling that on the thin Frenchman's face, Pierre pushed his way inhrough the crowd.
	"What is it? Who is it? What is it for?" he kept asking.
	But the attention of the crowd- officials, burghers, shopkeepers,easants, and women in cloaks and in pelisses- was so eagerly centeredn what was passing in Lobnoe Place that no one answered him. Thetout man rose, frowned, shrugged his shoulders, and evidentlyrying to appear firm began to pull on his jacket without lookingbout him, but suddenly his lips trembled and he began to cry, inhe way full-blooded grown-up men cry, though angry with himself foroing so. In the crowd people began talking loudly, to stifle theireelings of pity as it seemed to Pierre.
	"He's cook to some prince."
	"Eh, mounseer, Russian sauce seems to be sour to a Frenchman... setsis teeth on edge!" said a wrinkled clerk who was standing behindierre, when the Frenchman began to cry.
	The clerk glanced round, evidently hoping that his joke would beppreciated. Some people began to laugh, others continued to watchn dismay the executioner who was undressing the other man.
	Pierre choked, his face puckered, and he turned hastily away, wentack to his trap muttering something to himself as he went, and tookis seat. As they drove along he shuddered and exclaimed several timeso audibly that the coachman asked him:
	"What is your pleasure?"
	"Where are you going?" shouted Pierre to the man, who was driving toubyanka Street.
	"To the Governor's, as you ordered," answered the coachman.
	"Fool! Idiot!" shouted Pierre, abusing his coachman- a thing hearely did. "Home, I told you! And drive faster, blockhead!" "I mustet away this very day," he murmured to himself.
	At the sight of the tortured Frenchman and the crowd surrounding theobnoe Place, Pierre had so definitely made up his mind that heould no longer remain in Moscow and would leave for the army thatery day that it seemed to him that either he had told the coachmanhis or that the man ought to have known it for himself.
	On reaching home Pierre gave orders to Evstafey- his head coachmanho knew everything, could do anything, and was known to all Moscow-hat he would leave that night for the army at Mozhaysk, and thatis saddle horses should be sent there. This could not all be arrangedhat day, so on Evstafey's representation Pierre had to put off hiseparture till next day to allow time for the relay horses to beent on in advance.
	On the twenty-fourth the weather cleared up after a spell of rain,nd after dinner Pierre left Moscow. When changing horses that nightn Perkhushkovo, he learned that there had been a great battle thatvening. (This was the battle of Shevardino.) He was told that theren Perkhushkovo the earth trembled from the firing, but nobody couldnswer his questions as to who had won. At dawn next day Pierre waspproaching Mozhaysk.
	Every house in Mozhaysk had soldiers quartered in it, and at theostel where Pierre was met by his groom and coachman there was nooom to be had. It was full of officers.
	Everywhere in Mozhaysk and beyond it, troops were stationed or onhe march. Cossacks, foot and horse soldiers, wagons, caissons, andannon were everywhere. Pierre pushed forward as fast as he could, andhe farther he left Moscow behind and the deeper he plunged intohat sea of troops the more was he overcome by restless agitationnd a new and joyful feeling he had not experienced before. It was aeeling akin to what he had felt at the Sloboda Palace during themperor's visit- a sense of the necessity of undertaking something andacrificing something. He now experienced a glad consciousness thatverything that constitutes men's happiness- the comforts of life,ealth, even life itself- is rubbish it is pleasant to throw away,ompared with something... With what? Pierre could not say, and he didot try to determine for whom and for what he felt such particularelight in sacrificing everything. He was not occupied with theuestion of what to sacrifice for; the fact of sacrificing in itselffforded him a new and joyous sensation.BK10|CH19
	CHAPTER XIX
	On the twenty-fourth of August the battle of the Shevardinoedoubt was fought, on the twenty-fifth not a shot was fired by eitheride, and on the twenty-sixth the battle of Borodino itself tooklace.
	Why and how were the battles of Shevardino and Borodino given andccepted? Why was the battle of Borodino fought? There was not theeast sense in it for either the French or the Russians. Its immediateesult for the Russians was, and was bound to be, that we were broughtearer to the destruction of Moscow- which we feared more thannything in the world; and for the French its immediate result washat they were brought nearer to the destruction of their wholermy- which they feared more than anything in the world. What theesult must be was quite obvious, and yet Napoleon offered and Kutuzovccepted that battle.
	If the commanders had been guided by reason, it would seem that itust have been obvious to Napoleon that by advancing thirteenundred miles and giving battle with a probability of losing a quarterf his army, he was advancing to certain destruction, and it must haveeen equally clear to Kutuzov that by accepting battle and risking theoss of a quarter of his army he would certainly lose Moscow. Forutuzov this was mathematically clear, as it is that if when playingraughts I have one man less and go on exchanging, I shall certainlyose, and therefore should not exchange. When my opponent hasixteen men and I have fourteen, I am only one eighth weaker thane, but when I have exchanged thirteen more men he will be three timess strong as I am.
	Before the battle of Borodino our strength in proportion to therench was about as five to six, but after that battle it was littleore than one to two: previously we had a hundred thousand against aundred and twenty thousand; afterwards little more than fiftyhousand against a hundred thousand. Yet the shrewd and experiencedutuzov accepted the battle, while Napoleon, who was said to be aommander of genius, gave it, losing a quarter of his army andengthening his lines of communication still more. If it is saidhat he expected to end the campaign by occupying Moscow as he hadnded a previous campaign by occupying Vienna, there is muchvidence to the contrary. Napoleon's historians themselves tell ushat from Smolensk onwards he wished to stop, knew the danger of hisxtended position, and knew that the occupation of Moscow would not behe end of the campaign, for he had seen at Smolensk the state inhich Russian towns were left to him, and had not received a singleeply to his repeated announcements of his wish to negotiate.
	In giving and accepting battle at Borodino, Kutuzov actednvoluntarily and irrationally. But later on, to fit what hadccurred, the historians provided cunningly devised evidence of theoresight and genius the generals who, of all the blind tools ofistory were the most enslaved and involuntary.
	The ancients have left us model heroic poems in which the heroesurnish the whole interest of the story, and we are still unable toccustom ourselves to the fact that for our epoch histories of thatind are meaningless.
	On the other question, how the battle of Borodino and thereceding battle of Shevardino were fought, there also exists aefinite and well-known, but quite false, conception. All theistorians describe the affair as follows:
	The Russian army, they say, in its retreat from Smolensk soughtut for itself the best position for a general engagement and founduch a position at Borodino.
	The Russians, they say, fortified this position in advance on theeft of the highroad (from Moscow to Smolensk) and almost at a rightngle to it, from Borodino to Utitsa, at the very place where theattle was fought.
	In front of this position, they say, a fortified outpost was setp on the Shevardino mound to observe the enemy. On the twenty-fourth,e are told, Napoleon attacked this advanced post and took it, and, onhe twenty-sixth, attacked the whole Russian army, which was inosition on the field of Borodino.
	So the histories say, and it is all quite wrong, as anyone who careso look into the matter can easily convince himself.
	The Russians did not seek out the best position but, on theontrary, during the retreat passed many positions better thanorodino. They did not stop at any one of these positions becauseutuzov did not wish to occupy a position he had not himself chosen,ecause the popular demand for a battle had not yet expressed itselftrongly enough, and because Miloradovich had not yet arrived with theilitia, and for many other reasons. The fact is that otherositions they had passed were stronger, and that the position atorodino (the one where the battle was fought), far from being strong,as no more a position than any other spot one might find in theussian Empire by sticking a pin into the map at hazard.
	Not only did the Russians not fortify the position on the field oforodino to the left of, and at a right angle to, the highroad (thats, the position on which the battle took place), but never till thewenty-fifth of August, 1812, did they think that a battle might beought there. This was shown first by the fact that there were nontrenchments there by the twenty fifth and that those begun on thewenty-fifth and twenty-sixth were not completed, and secondly, by theosition of the Shevardino Redoubt. That redoubt was quite senselessn front of the position where the battle was accepted. Why was itore strongly fortified than any other post? And why were allfforts exhausted and six thousand men sacrificed to defend it tillate at night on the twenty-fourth? A Cossack patrol would haveufficed to observe the enemy. Thirdly, as proof that the positionn which the battle was fought had not been foreseen and that thehevardino Redoubt was not an advanced post of that position, weave the fact that up to the twenty-fifth, Barclay de Tolly andagration were convinced that the Shevardino Redoubt was the leftlank of the position, and that Kutuzov himself in his report, writtenn hot haste after the battle, speaks of the Shevardino Redoubt as theeft flank of the position. It was much later, when reports on theattle of Borodino were written at leisure, that the incorrect andxtraordinary statement was invented (probably to justify the mistakesf a commander in chief who had to be represented as infallible)hat the Shevardino Redoubt was an advanced post- whereas in realityt was simply a fortified point on the left flank- and that the battlef Borodino was fought by us on an entrenched position previouslyelected, where as it was fought on a quite unexpected spot whichas almost unentrenched.
	The case was evidently this: a position was selected along the riverolocha- which crosses the highroad not at a right angle but at ancute angle- so that the left flank was at Shevardino, the right flankear the village of Novoe, and the center at Borodino at theonfluence of the rivers Kolocha and Voyna.
	To anyone who looks at the field of Borodino without thinking of howhe battle was actually fought, this position, protected by theiver Kolocha, presents itself as obvious for an army whose object waso prevent an enemy from advancing along the Smolensk road to Moscow.
	Napoleon, riding to Valuevo on the twenty-fourth, did not see (ashe history books say he did) the position of the Russians from Utitsao Borodino (he could not have seen that position because it did notxist), nor did he see an advanced post of the Russian army, but whileursuing the Russian rearguard he came upon the left flank of theussian position- at the Shevardino Redoubt- and unexpectedly forhe Russians moved his army across the Kolocha. And the Russians,ot having time to begin a general engagement, withdrew their lefting from the position they had intended to occupy and took up a newosition which had not been foreseen and was not fortified. Byrossing to the other side of the Kolocha to the left of the highroad,apoleon shifted the whole forthcoming battle from right to leftlooking from the Russian side) and transferred it to the plainetween Utitsa, Semenovsk, and Borodino- a plain no moredvantageous as a position than any other plain in Russia- and therehe whole battle of the twenty-sixth of August took place.
	Had Napoleon not ridden out on the evening of the twenty-fourth tohe Kolocha, and had he not then ordered an immediate attack on theedoubt but had begun the attack next morning, no one would haveoubted that the Shevardino Redoubt was the left flank of our andhe battle would have taken place where we expected it. In that casee should probably have defended the Shevardino Redoubt- our leftlank- still more obstinately. We should have attacked Napoleon in theenter or on the right, and the engagement would have taken place onhe twenty-fifth, in the position we intended and had fortified. Buts the attack on our left flank took place in the evening after theetreat of our rea guard (that is, immediately after the fight atridneva), and as the Russian commanders did not wish, or were notn time, to begin a general engagement then on the evening of thewenty-fourth, the first and chief action of the battle of Borodinoas already lost on the twenty-fourth, and obviously led to the lossf the one fought on the twenty-sixth.
	After the loss of the Shevardino Redoubt, we found ourselves onhe morning of the twenty-fifth without a position for our left flank,nd were forced to bend it back and hastily entrench it where ithanced to be.
	Not only was the Russian army on the twenty-sixth defended byeak, unfinished entrenchments, but the disadvantage of thatosition was increased by the fact that the Russian commanders- notaving fully realized what had happened, namely the loss of ourosition on the left flank and the shifting of the whole field ofhe forthcoming battle from right to left- maintained their extendedosition from the village of Novoe to Utitsa, and consequently hado move their forces from right to left during the battle. So itappened that throughout the whole battle the Russians opposed thentire French army launched against our left flank with but half asany men. (Poniatowski's action against Utitsa, and Uvarov's on theight flank against the French, were actions distinct from the mainourse of the battle.) So the battle of Borodino did not take place atll as (in an effort to conceal our commanders' mistakes even at theost of diminishing the glory due to the Russian army and people) itas been described. The battle of Borodino was not fought on ahosen and entrenched position with forces only slightly weaker thanhose of the enemy, but, as a result of the loss of the Shevardinoedoubt, the Russians fought the battle of Borodino on an open andlmost unentrenched position, with forces only half as numerous as therench; that is to say, under conditions in which it was not merelynthinkable to fight for ten hours and secure an indecisive result,ut unthinkable to keep an army even from complete disintegrationnd flight.BK10|CH20
	CHAPTER XX
	On the morning of the twenty-fifth Pierre was leaving Mozhaysk. Athe descent of the high steep hill, down which a winding road ledut of the town past the cathedral on the right, where a service waseing held and the bells were ringing, Pierre got out of his vehiclend proceeded on foot. Behind him a cavalry regiment was coming downhe hill preceded by its singers. Coming up toward him was a trainf carts carrying men who had been wounded in the engagement the dayefore. The peasant drivers, shouting and lashing their horses, keptrossing from side to side. The carts, in each of which three orour wounded soldiers were lying or sitting, jolted over the stoneshat had been thrown on the steep incline to make it something like road. The wounded, bandaged with rags, with pale cheeks,ompressed lips, and knitted brows, held on to the sides of thearts as they were jolted against one another. Almost all of themtared with naive, childlike curiosity at Pierre's white hat and greenwallow-tail coat.
	Pierre's coachman shouted angrily at the convoy of wounded to keepo one side of the road. The cavalry regiment, as it descended theill with its singers, surrounded Pierre's carriage and blocked theoad. Pierre stopped, being pressed against the side of the cutting inhich the road ran. The sunshine from behind the hill did notenetrate into the cutting and there it was cold and damp, but aboveierre's head was the bright August sunshine and the bells soundederrily. One of the carts with wounded stopped by the side of the roadlose to Pierre. The driver in his bast shoes ran panting up to it,laced a stone under one of its tireless hind wheels, and beganrranging the breech-band on his little horse.
	One of the wounded, an old soldier with a bandaged arm who wasollowing the cart on foot, caught hold of it with his sound handnd turned to look at Pierre.
	"I say, fellow countryman! Will they set us down here or take usn to Moscow?" he asked.
	Pierre was so deep in thought that he did not hear the question.e was looking now at the cavalry regiment that had met the convoyf wounded, now at the cart by which he was standing, in which twoounded men were sitting and one was lying. One of those sitting up inhe cart had probably been wounded in the cheek. His whole head wasrapped in rags and one cheek was swollen to the size of a baby'sead. His nose and mouth were twisted to one side. This soldier wasooking at the cathedral and crossing himself. Another, a young lad, aair-haired recruit as white as though there was no blood in hishin face, looked at Pierre kindly, with a fixed smile. The thirday prone so that his face was not visible. The cavalry singers wereassing close by:
	   Ah lost, quite lost... is my head so keen,
	   Living in a foreign land.hey sang their soldiers' dance song.
	As if responding to them but with a different sort of merriment, theetallic sound of the bells reverberated high above and the hot raysf the sun bathed the top of the opposite slope with yet anotherort of merriment. But beneath the slope, by the cart with the woundedear the panting little nag where Pierre stood, it was damp, somber,nd sad.
	The soldier with the swollen cheek looked angrily at the cavalryingers.
	"Oh, the coxcombs!" he muttered reproachfully.
	"It's not the soldiers only, but I've seen peasants today, too....he peasants- even they have to go," said the soldier behind the cart,ddressing Pierre with a sad smile. "No distinctions made nowadays....hey want the whole nation to fall on them- in a word, it's Moscow!hey want to make an end of it."
	In spite of the obscurity of the soldier's words Pierre understoodhat he wanted to say and nodded approval.
	The road was clear again; Pierre descended the hill and drove on.
	He kept looking to either side of the road for familiar faces, butnly saw everywhere the unfamiliar faces of various military men ofifferent branches of the service, who all looked with astonishment atis white hat and green tail coat.
	Having gone nearly three miles he at last met an acquaintance andagerly addressed him. This was one of the head army doctors. He wasriving toward Pierre in a covered gig, sitting beside a youngurgeon, and on recognizing Pierre he told the Cossack who occupiedhe driver's seat to pull up.
	"Count! Your excellency, how come you to be here?" asked the doctor.
	"Well, you know, I wanted to see..."
	"Yes, yes, there will be something to see...."
	Pierre got out and talked to the doctor, explaining his intention ofaking part in a battle.
	The doctor advised him to apply direct to Kutuzov.
	"Why should you be God knows where out of sight, during the battle?"e said, exchanging glances with his young companion. "Anyhow hiserene Highness knows you and will receive you graciously. That's whatou must do."
	The doctor seemed tired and in a hurry.
	"You think so?... Ah, I also wanted to ask you where our position isxactly?" said Pierre.
	"The position?" repeated the doctor. "Well, that's not my line.rive past Tatarinova, a lot of digging is going on there. Go up theillock and you'll see."
	"Can one see from there?... If you would..."
	But the doctor interrupted him and moved toward his gig.
	"I would go with you but on my honor I'm up to here"- and he pointedo his throat. "I'm galloping to the commander of the corps. How doatters stand?... You know, Count, there'll be a battle tomorrow.ut of an army of a hundred thousand we must expect at least twentyhousand wounded, and we haven't stretchers, or bunks, or dressers, oroctors enough for six thousand. We have ten thousand carts, but weeed other things as well- we must manage as best we can!"
	The strange thought that of the thousands of men, young and old, whoad stared with merry surprise at his hat (perhaps the very men he hadoticed), twenty thousand were inevitably doomed to wounds and deathmazed Pierre.
	"They may die tomorrow; why are they thinking of anything buteath?" And by some latent sequence of thought the descent of theozhaysk hill, the carts with the wounded, the ringing bells, thelanting rays of the sun, and the songs of the cavalrymen vividlyecurred to his mind.
	"The cavalry ride to battle and meet the wounded and do not for aoment think of what awaits them, but pass by, winking at the wounded.et from among these men twenty thousand are doomed to die, and theyonder at my hat! Strange!" thought Pierre, continuing his way toatarinova.
	In front of a landowner's house to the left of the road stoodarriages, wagons, and crowds of orderlies and sentinels. Theommander in chief was putting up there, but just when Pierrerrived he was not in and hardly any of the staff were there- they hadone to the church service. Pierre drove on toward Gorki.
	When he had ascended the hill and reached the little village street,e saw for the first time peasant militiamen in their white shirts andith crosses on their caps, who, talking and laughing loudly, animatednd perspiring, were at work on a huge knoll overgrown with grass tohe right of the road.
	Some of them were digging, others were wheeling barrowloads of earthlong planks, while others stood about doing nothing.
	Two officers were standing on the knoll, directing the men. Oneeing these peasants, who were evidently still amused by theovelty of their position as soldiers, Pierre once more thought of theounded men at Mozhaysk and understood what the soldier had meant whene said: "They want the whole nation to fall on them." The sight ofhese bearded peasants at work on the battlefield, with their queer,lumsy boots and perspiring necks, and their shirts opening from theeft toward the middle, unfastened, exposing their sunburnedollarbones, impressed Pierre more strongly with the solemnity andmportance of the moment than anything he had yet seen or heard.BK10|CH21
	CHAPTER XXI
	Pierre stepped out of his carriage and, passing the toilingilitiamen, ascended the knoll from which, according to the doctor,he battlefield could be seen.
	It was about eleven o'clock. The sun shone somewhat to the leftnd behind him and brightly lit up the enormous panorama which, risingike an amphitheater, extended before him in the clear rarefiedtmosphere.
	From above on the left, bisecting that amphitheater, wound themolensk highroad, passing through a village with a white churchome five hundred paces in front of the knoll and below it. This wasorodino. Below the village the road crossed the river by a bridgend, winding down and up, rose higher and higher to the village ofaluevo visible about four miles away, where Napoleon was thentationed. Beyond Valuevo the road disappeared into a yellowing forestn the horizon. Far in the distance in that birch and fir forest tohe right of the road, the cross and belfry of the Kolocha Monasteryleamed in the sun. Here and there over the whole of that bluexpanse, to right and left of the forest and the road, smokingampfires could be seen and indefinite masses of troops- ours andhe enemy's. The ground to the right- along the course of theolocha and Moskva rivers- was broken and hilly. Between the hollowshe villages of Bezubova and Zakharino showed in the distance. Onhe left the ground was more level; there were fields of grain, andhe smoking ruins of Semenovsk, which had been burned down, could beeen.
	All that Pierre saw was so indefinite that neither the left norhe right side of the field fully satisfied his expectations.owhere could he see the battlefield he had expected to find, but onlyields, meadows, troops, woods, the smoke of campfires, villages,ounds, and streams; and try as he would he could descry no militaryposition" in this place which teemed with life, nor could he evenistinguish our troops from the enemy's.
	"I must ask someone who knows," he thought, and addressed an officerho was looking with curiosity at his huge unmilitary figure.
	"May I ask you," said Pierre, "what village that is in front?"
	"Burdino, isn't it?" said the officer, turning to his companion.
	"Borodino," the other corrected him.
	The officer, evidently glad of an opportunity for a talk, moved upo Pierre.
	"Are those our men there?" Pierre inquired.
	"Yes, and there, further on, are the French," said the officer.There they are, there... you can see them."
	"Where? Where?" asked Pierre.
	"One can see them with the naked eye... Why, there!"
	The officer pointed with his hand to the smoke visible on the lefteyond the river, and the same stern and serious expression thatierre had noticed on many of the faces he had met came into his face.
	"Ah, those are the French! And over there?..." Pierre pointed to anoll on the left, near which some troops could be seen.
	"Those are ours."
	"Ah, ours! And there?..." Pierre pointed to another knoll in theistance with a big tree on it, near a village that lay in a hollowhere also some campfires were smoking and something black wasisible.
	"That's his again," said the officer. (It was the Shevardinoedoubt.) "It was ours yesterday, but now it is his."
	"Then how about our position?"
	"Our position?" replied the officer with a smile of satisfaction. "Ian tell you quite clearly, because I constructed nearly all ourntrenchments. There, you see? There's our center, at Borodino, justhere," and he pointed to the village in front of them with thehite church. "That's where one crosses the Kolocha. You see downhere where the rows of hay are lying in the hollow, there's theridge. That's our center. Our right flank is over there"- heointed sharply to the right, far away in the broken ground- "That'shere the Moskva River is, and we have thrown up three redoubts there,ery strong ones. The left flank..." here the officer paused. "Well,ou see, that's difficult to explain.... Yesterday our left flankas there at Shevardino, you see, where the oak is, but now we haveithdrawn our left wing- now it is over there, do you see that villagend the smoke? That's Semenovsk, yes, there," he pointed toaevski's knoll. "But the battle will hardly be there. His havingoved his troops there is only a ruse; he will probably pass roundo the right of the Moskva. But wherever it may be, many a man will beissing tomorrow!" he remarked.
	An elderly sergeant who had approached the officer while he wasiving these explanations had waited in silence for him to finishpeaking, but at this point, evidently not liking the officer'semark, interrupted him.
	"Gabions must be sent for," said he sternly.
	The officer appeared abashed, as though he understood that one mighthink of how many men would be missing tomorrow but ought not to speako speak of it.
	"Well, send number three company again," the officer repliedurriedly.
	"And you, are you one of the doctors?"
	"No, I've come on my own," answered Pierre, and he went down theill again, passing the militiamen.
	"Oh, those damned fellows!" muttered the officer who followed him,olding his nose as he ran past the men at work.
	"There they are... bringing her, coming... There they are... They'lle here in a minute..." voices were suddenly heard saying; andfficers, soldiers, and militiamen began running forward along theoad.
	A church procession was coming up the hill from Borodino. Firstlong the dusty road came the infantry in ranks, bareheaded and withrms reversed. From behind them came the sound of church singing.
	Soldiers and militiamen ran bareheaded past Pierre toward therocession.
	"They are bringing her, our Protectress!... The Iberian Mother ofod!" someone cried.
	"The Smolensk Mother of God," another corrected him.
	The militiamen, both those who had been in the village and those whoad been at work on the battery, threw down their spades and ran toeet the church procession. Following the battalion that marched alonghe dusty road came priests in their vestments- one little old mann a hood with attendants and singers. Behind them soldiers andfficers bore a large, dark-faced icon with an embossed metal cover.his was the icon that had been brought from and had since accompaniedhe army. Behind, before, and on both sides, crowds of militiamen withared heads walked, ran, and bowed to the ground.
	At the summit of the hill they stopped with the icon; the men whoad been holding it up by the linen bands attached to it were relievedy others, the chanters relit their censers, and service began. Theot rays of the sun beat down vertically and a fresh soft windlayed with the hair of the bared heads and with the ribbonsecorating the icon. The singing did not sound loud under the openky. An immense crowd of bareheaded officers, soldiers, and militiamenurrounded the icon. Behind the priest and a chanter stood theotabilities on a spot reserved for them. A bald general witheneral with a St. George's Cross on his neck stood just behind theriest's back, and without crossing himself (he was evidently aerman) patiently awaited the end of the service, which heonsidered it necessary to hear to the end, probably to arouse theatriotism of the Russian people. Another general stood in a martialose, crossing himself by shaking his hand in front of his chest whileooking about him. Standing among the crowd of peasants, Pierreecognized several acquaintances among these notables, but did notook at them- his whole attention was absorbed in watching the seriousxpression on the faces of the crowd of soldiers and militiamen whoere all gazing eagerly at the icon. As soon as the tired chanters,ho were singing the service for the twentieth time that day, beganazily and mechanically to sing: "Save from calamity Thy servants, Oother of God," and the priest and deacon chimed in: "For to Theender God we all flee as to an inviolable bulwark and protection,"here again kindled in all those faces the same expression ofonsciousness of the solemnity of the impending moment that Pierre hadeen on the faces at the foot of the hill at Mozhaysk andomentarily on many and many faces he had met that morning; andeads were bowed more frequently and hair tossed back, and sighs andhe sound men made as they crossed themselves were heard.
	The crowd round the icon suddenly parted and pressed against Pierre.omeone, a very important personage judging by the haste with whichay was made for him, was approaching the icon.
	It was Kutuzov, who had been riding round the position and on hisay back to Tatarinova had stopped where the service was being held.ierre recognized him at once by his peculiar figure, whichistinguished him from everybody else.
	With a long overcoat on his his exceedingly stout,ound-shouldered body, with uncovered white head and puffy facehowing the white ball of the eye he had lost, Kutuzov walked withlunging, swaying gait into the crowd and stopped behind the priest.e crossed himself with an accustomed movement, bent till he touchedhe ground with his hand, and bowed his white head with a deep sigh.ehind Kutuzov was Bennigsen and the suite. Despite the presence ofhe commander in chief, who attracted the attention of all theuperior officers, the militiamen and soldiers continued their prayersithout looking at him.
	When the service was over, Kutuzov stepped up to the icon, sankeavily to his knees, bowed to the ground, and for a long time triedainly to rise, but could not do so on account of his weakness andeight. His white head twitched with the effort. At last he rose,issed the icon as a child does with naively pouting lips, and againowed till he touched the ground with his hand. The other generalsollowed his example, then the officers, and after them with excitedaces, pressing on one another, crowding, panting, and pushing,crambled the soldiers and militiamen.BK10|CH22
	CHAPTER XXII
	Staggering amid the crush, Pierre looked about him.
	"Count Peter Kirilovich! How did you get here?" said a voice.
	Pierre looked round. Boris Drubetskoy, brushing his knees with hisand (he had probably soiled them when he, too, had knelt before thecon), came up to him smiling. Boris was elegantly dressed, with alightly martial touch appropriate to a campaign. He wore a longoat and like Kutuzov had a whip slung across his shoulder.
	Meanwhile Kutuzov had reached the village and seated himself inhe shade of the nearest house, on a bench which one Cossack had runo fetch and another had hastily covered with a rug. An immense andrilliant suite surrounded him.
	The icon was carried further, accompanied by the throng. Pierretopped some thirty paces from Kutuzov, talking to Boris.
	He explained his wish to be present at the battle and to see theosition.
	"This is what you must do," said Boris. "I will do the honors of theamp to you. You will see everything best from where Count Bennigsenill be. I am in attendance on him, you know; I'll mention it toim. But if you want to ride round the position, come along with us.e are just going to the left flank. Then when we get back, do spendhe night with me and we'll arrange a game of cards. Of course younow Dmitri Sergeevich? Those are his quarters," and he pointed to thehird house in the village of Gorki.
	"But I should like to see the right flank. They say it's verytrong," said Pierre. "I should like to start from the Moskva Rivernd ride round the whole position."
	"Well, you can do that later, but the chief thing is the leftlank."
	"Yes, yes. But where is Prince Bolkonski's regiment? Can you pointt out to me?"
	"Prince Andrew's? We shall pass it and I'll take you to him."
	What about the left flank?" asked Pierre
	"To tell you the truth, between ourselves, God only knows what stateur left flank is in," said Boris confidentially lowering his voice.It is not at all what Count Bennigsen intended. He meant to fortifyhat knoll quite differently, but..." Boris shrugged his shoulders,his Serene Highness would not have it, or someone persuaded him.ou see..." but Boris did not finish, for at that moment Kaysarov,utuzov's adjutant, came up to Pierre. "Ah, Kaysarov!" said Boris,ddressing him with an unembarrassed smile, "I was just trying toxplain our position to the count. It is amazing how his Sereneighness could so the intentions of the French!"
	"You mean the left flank?" asked Kaysarov.
	"Yes, exactly; the left flank is now extremely strong."
	Though Kutuzov had dismissed all unnecessary men from the staff,oris had contrived to remain at headquarters after the changes. Head established himself with Count Bennigsen, who, like all on whomoris had been in attendance, considered young Prince Drubetskoy annvaluable man.
	In the higher command there were two sharply defined parties:utuzov's party and that of Bennigsen, the chief of staff. Boriselonged to the latter and no one else, while showing servileespect to Kutuzov, could so create an impression that the oldellow was not much good and that Bennigsen managed everything. Nowhe decisive moment of battle had come when Kutuzov would be destroyednd the power pass to Bennigsen, or even if Kutuzov won the battlet would be felt that everything was done by Bennigsen. In any caseany great rewards would have to be given for tomorrow's action, andew men would come to the front. So Boris was full of nervous vivacityll day.
	After Kaysarov, others whom Pierre knew came up to him, and he hadot time to reply to all the questions about Moscow that were showeredpon him, or to listen to all that was told him. The faces allxpressed animation and apprehension, but it seemed to Pierre that theause of the excitement shown in some of these faces lay chiefly inuestions of personal success; his mind, however, was occupied byhe different expression he saw on other faces- an expression thatpoke not of personal matters but of the universal questions of lifend death. Kutuzov noticed Pierre's figure and the group gatheredound him.
	"Call him to me," said Kutuzov.
	An adjutant told Pierre of his Serene Highness' wish, and Pierreent toward Kutuzov's bench. But a militiaman got there before him. Itas Dolokhov.
	"How did that fellow get here?" asked Pierre.
	"He's a creature that wriggles in anywhere!" was the answer. "He haseen degraded, you know. Now he wants to bob up again. He's beenroposing some scheme or other and has crawled into the enemy's picketine at night.... He's a brave fellow."
	Pierre took off his hat and bowed respectfully to Kutuzov.
	"I concluded that if I reported to your Serene Highness you mightend me away or say that you knew what I was reporting, but then Ihouldn't lose anything..." Dolokhov was saying.
	"Yes, yes."
	"But if I were right, I should be rendering a service to myatherland for which I am ready to die."
	"Yes, yes."
	"And should your Serene Highness require a man who will not spareis skin, please think of me.... Perhaps I may prove useful to yourerene Highness."
	"Yes... Yes..." Kutuzov repeated, his laughing eye narrowing morend more as he looked at Pierre.
	Just then Boris, with his courtierlike adroitness, stepped up toierre's side near Kutuzov and in a most natural manner, withoutaising his voice, said to Pierre, as though continuing an interruptedonversation:
	"The militia have put on clean white shirts to be ready to die. Whateroism, Count!"
	Boris evidently said this to Pierre in order to be overheard byis Serene Highness. He knew Kutuzov's attention would be caught byhose words, and so it was.
	"What are you saying about the militia?" he asked Boris.
	"Preparing for tomorrow, your Serene Highness- for death- theyave put on clean shirts."
	"Ah... a wonderful, a matchless people!" said Kutuzov; and he closedis eyes and swayed his head. "A matchless people!" he repeated with aigh.
	"So you want to smell gunpowder?" he said to Pierre. "Yes, it's aleasant smell. I have the honor to be one of your wife's adorers.s she well? My quarters are at your service."
	And as often happens with old people, Kutuzov began looking aboutbsent-mindedly as if forgetting all he wanted to say or do.
	Then, evidently remembering what he wanted, he beckoned to Andrewaysarov, his adjutant's brother.
	"Those verses... those verses of Marin's... how do they go, eh?hose he wrote about Gerakov: 'Lectures for the corps inditing'...ecite them, recite them!" said he, evidently preparing to laugh.
	Kaysarov recited.... Kutuzov smilingly nodded his head to the rhythmf the verses.
	When Pierre had left Kutuzov, Dolokhov came up to him and took hisand.
	"I am very glad to meet you here, Count," he said aloud,egardless of the presence of strangers and in a particularly resolutend solemn tone. "On the eve of a day when God alone knows who of uss fated to survive, I am glad of this opportunity to tell you that regret the misunderstandings that occurred between us and shouldish you not to have any ill feeling for me. I beg you to forgive me."
	Pierre looked at Dolokhov with a smile, not knowing what to say toim. With tears in his eyes Dolokhov embraced Pierre and kissed him.
	Boris said a few words to his general, and Count Bennigsen turned toierre and proposed that he should ride with him along the line.
	"It will interest you," said he.
	"Yes, very much," replied Pierre.
	Half an hour later Kutuzov left for Tatarinova, and Bennigsen andis suite, with Pierre among them, set out on their ride along theine.BK10|CH23
	CHAPTER XXIII
	From Gorki, Bennigsen descended the highroad to the bridge which,hen they had looked it from the hill, the officer had pointed outs being the center of our position and where rows of fragrantew-mown hay lay by the riverside. They rode across that bridge intohe village of Borodino and thence turned to the left, passing annormous number of troops and guns, and came to a high knoll whereilitiamen were digging. This was the redoubt, as yet unnamed, whichfterwards became known as the Raevski Redoubt, or the Knollattery, but Pierre paid no special attention to it. He did not knowhat it would become more memorable to him than any other spot onhe plain of Borodino.
	They then crossed the hollow to Semenovsk, where the soldiers wereragging away the last logs from the huts and barns. Then they rodeownhill and uphill, across a ryefield trodden and beaten down as ify hail, following a track freshly made by the artillery over theurrows of the plowed land, and reached some fleches* which were stilleing dug.
	*A kind of entrenchment.
	At the fleches Bennigsen stopped and began looking at the Shevardinoedoubt opposite, which had been ours the day before and where severalorsemen could be descried. The officers said that either Napoleonr Murat was there, and they all gazed eagerly at this little group oforsemen. Pierre also looked at them, trying to guess which of thecarcely discernible figures was Napoleon. At last those mounted menode away from the mound and disappeared.
	Bennigsen spoke to a general who approached him, and beganxplaining the whole position of our troops. Pierre listened to him,training each faculty to understand the essential points of thempending battle, but was mortified to feel that his mental capacityas inadequate for the task. He could make nothing of it. Bennigsentopped speaking and, noticing that Pierre was listening, suddenlyaid to him:
	"I don't think this interests you?"
	"On the contrary it's very interesting!" replied Pierre not quiteruthfully.
	From the fleches they rode still farther to the left, along a roadinding through a thick, low-growing birch wood. In the middle ofhe wood a brown hare with white feet sprang out and, scared by theramp of the many horses, grew so confused that it leaped along theoad in front of them for some time, arousing general attention andaughter, and only when several voices shouted at it did it dart tone side and disappear in the thicket. After going through the woodor about a mile and a half they came out on a glade where troops ofuchkov's corps were stationed to defend the left flank.
	Here, at the extreme left flank, Bennigsen talked a great deal andith much heat, and, as it seemed to Pierre, gave orders of greatilitary importance. In front of Tuchkov's troops was some high groundot occupied by troops. Bennigsen loudly criticized this mistake,aying that it was madness to leave a height which commanded theountry around unoccupied and to place troops below it. Some of theenerals expressed the same opinion. One in particular declared withartial heat that they were put there to be slaughtered. Bennigsenn his own authority ordered the troops to occupy the high ground.his disposition on the left flank increased Pierre's doubt of his ownapacity to understand military matters. Listening to Bennigsen andhe generals criticizing the position of the troops behind the hill,e quite understood them and shared their opinion, but for that veryeason he could not understand how the man who put them there behindhe hill could have made so gross and palpable a blunder.
	Pierre did not know that these troops were not, as Bennigsenupposed, put there to defend the position, but were in a concealedosition as an ambush, that they should not be seen and might beble to strike an approaching enemy unexpectedly. Bennigsen did notnow this and moved the troops forward according to his own ideasithout mentioning the matter to the commander in chief.BK10|CH24
	CHAPTER XXIV
	On that bright evening of August 25, Prince Andrew lay leaning onis elbow in a broken-down shed in the village of Knyazkovo at theurther end of his regiment's encampment. Through a gap in theroken wall he could see, beside the wooden fence, a row of thirtyear-old birches with their lower branches lopped off, a field onhich shocks of oats were standing, and some bushes near which rosehe smoke of campfires- the soldiers' kitchens.
	Narrow and burdensome and useless to anyone as his life now seemedo him, Prince Andrew on the eve of battle felt agitated and irritables he had done seven years before at Austerlitz.
	He had received and given the orders for next day's battle and hadothing more to do. But his thoughts- the simplest, clearest, andherefore most terrible thoughts- would give him no peace. He knewhat tomorrow's battle would be the most terrible of all he hadaken part in, and for the first time in his life the possibility ofeath presented itself to him- not in relation to any worldly matterr with reference to its effect on others, but simply in relation toimself, to his own soul- vividly, plainly, terribly, and almost as certainty. And from the height of this perception all that hadreviously tormented and preoccupied him suddenly became illuminedy a cold white light without shadows, without perspective, withoutistinction of outline. All life appeared to him like magic-lanternictures at which he had long been gazing by artificial lighthrough a glass. Now he suddenly saw those badly daubed pictures inlear daylight and without a glass. "Yes, yes! There they are, thosealse images that agitated, enraptured, and tormented me," said heo himself, passing in review the principal pictures of the magicantern of life and regarding them now in the cold white daylight ofis clear perception of death. "There they are, those rudely paintedigures that once seemed splendid and mysterious. Glory, the good ofociety, love of a woman, the Fatherland itself- how important theseictures appeared to me, with what profound meaning they seemed toe filled! And it is all so simple, pale, and crude in the coldhite light of this morning which I feel is dawning for me." The threereat sorrows of his life held his attention in particular: his loveor a woman, his father's death, and the French invasion which hadverrun half Russia. "Love... that little girl who seemed to merimming over with mystic forces! Yes, indeed, I loved her. I madeomantic plans of love and happiness with her! Oh, what a boy Ias!" he said aloud bitterly. "Ah me! I believed in some ideal lovehich was to keep her faithful to me for the whole year of my absence!ike the gentle dove in the fable she was to pine apart from me....ut it was much simpler really.... It was all very simple andorrible."
	"When my father built Bald Hills he thought the place was his: hisand, his air, his peasants. But Napoleon came and swept him aside,nconscious of his existence, as he might brush a chip from hisath, and his Bald Hills and his whole life fell to pieces. Princessary says it is a trial sent from above. What is the trial for, whene is not here and will never return? He is not here! For whom then ishe trial intended? The Fatherland, the destruction of Moscow! Andomorrow I shall be killed, perhaps not even by a Frenchman but by onef our own men, by a soldier discharging a musket close to my ear asne of them did yesterday, and the French will come and take me byead and heels and fling me into a hole that I may not stink underheir noses, and new conditions of life will arise, which will seemuite ordinary to others and about which I shall know nothing. I shallot exist..."
	He looked at the row of birches shining in the sunshine, withheir motionless green and yellow foliage and white bark. "To die...o be killed tomorrow... That I should not exist... That all thishould still be, but no me...."
	And the birches with their light and shade, the curly clouds, themoke of the campfires, and all that was around him changed and seemederrible and menacing. A cold shiver ran down his spine. He roseuickly, went out of the shed, and began to walk about.
	After he had returned, voices were heard outside the shed. "Who'shat?" he cried.
	The red-nosed Captain Timokhin, formerly Dolokhov's squadronommander, but now from lack of officers a battalion commander,hyly entered the shed followed by an adjutant and the regimentalaymaster.
	Prince Andrew rose hastily, listened to the business they had comebout, gave them some further instructions, and was about to dismisshem when he heard a familiar, lisping, voice behind the shed.
	"Devil take it!" said the voice of a man stumbling over something.
	Prince Andrew looked out of the shed and saw Pierre, who had trippedver a pole on the ground and had nearly fallen, coming his way. Itas unpleasant to Prince Andrew to meet people of his own set ineneral, and Pierre especially, for he reminded him of all the painfuloments of his last visit to Moscow.
	"You? What a surprise!" said he. "What brings you here? This isnexpected!"
	As he said this his eyes and face expressed more than coldness- theyxpressed hostility, which Pierre noticed at once. He had approachedhe shed full of animation, but on seeing Prince Andrew's face he feltonstrained and ill at ease.
	"I have come... simply... you know... come... it interests me," saidierre, who had so often that day senselessly repeated that wordinteresting." "I wish to see the battle."
	"Oh yes, and what do the Masonic brothers say about war? How wouldhey stop it?" said Prince Andrew sarcastically. "Well, and how'soscow? And my people? Have they reached Moscow at last?" he askederiously.
	"Yes, they have. Julie Drubetskaya told me so. I went to see them,ut missed them. They have gone to your estate near Moscow."BK10|CH25
	CHAPTER XXV
	The officers were about to take leave, but Prince Andrew, apparentlyeluctant to be left alone with his friend, asked them to stay andave tea. Seats were brought in and so was the tea. The officers gazedith surprise at Pierre's huge stout figure and listened to his talkf Moscow and the position of our army, round which he had ridden.rince Andrew remained silent, and his expression was so forbiddinghat Pierre addressed his remarks chiefly to the good-naturedattalion commander.
	"So you understand the whole position of our troops?" Princendrew interrupted him.
	"Yes- that is, how do you mean?" said Pierre. "Not being ailitary man I can't say I have understood it fully, but Inderstand the general position."
	"Well, then, you know more than anyone else, be it who it may," saidrince Andrew.
	"Oh!" said Pierre, looking over his spectacles in perplexity atrince Andrew. "Well, and what do think of Kutuzov's appointment?"e asked.
	"I was very glad of his appointment, that's all I know," repliedrince Andrew.
	"And tell me your opinion of Barclay de Tolly. In Moscow they areaying heaven knows what about him.... What do you think of him?"
	"Ask them," replied Prince Andrew, indicating the officers.
	Pierre looked at Timokhin with the condescendingly interrogativemile with which everybody involuntarily addressed that officer.
	"We see light again, since his Serenity has been appointed, yourxcellency," said Timokhin timidly, and continually turning tolance at his colonel.
	"Why so?" asked Pierre.
	"Well, to mention only firewood and fodder, let me inform you.hy, when we were retreating from Sventsyani we dare not touch a stickr a wisp of hay or anything. You see, we were going away, so he wouldet it all; wasn't it so, your excellency?" and again Timokhinurned to the prince. "But we daren't. In our regiment two officersere court-martialed for that kind of thing. But when his Serenityook command everything became straight forward. Now we see light..."
	"Then why was it forbidden?"
	Timokhin looked about in confusion, not knowing what or how tonswer such a question. Pierre put the same question to Prince Andrew.
	"Why, so as not to lay waste the country we were abandoning to thenemy," said Prince Andrew with venomous irony. "It is very sound: onean't permit the land to be pillaged and accustom the troops toarauding. At Smolensk too he judged correctly that the French mightutflank us, as they had larger forces. But he could not understandhis," cried Prince Andrew in a shrill voice that seemed to escape himnvoluntarily: "he could not understand that there, for the firstime, we were fighting for Russian soil, and that there was a spiritn the men such as I had never seen before, that we had held therench for two days, and that that success had increased ourtrength tenfold. He ordered us to retreat, and all our efforts andosses went for nothing. He had no thought of betraying us, he triedo do the best he could, he thought out everything, and that is why hes unsuitable. He is unsuitable now, just because he plans outverything very thoroughly and accurately as every German has to.ow can I explain?... Well, say your father has a German valet, and hes a splendid valet and satisfies your father's requirements betterhan you could, then it's all right to let him serve. But if yourather is mortally sick you'll send the valet away and attend toour father with your own unpracticed, awkward hands, and willoothe him better than a skilled man who is a stranger could. So itas been with Barclay. While Russia was well, a foreigner coulderve her and be a splendid minister; but as soon as she is inanger she needs one of her own kin. But in your Club they have beenaking him out a traitor! They slander him as a traitor, and thenly result will be that afterwards, ashamed of their falseccusations, they will make him out a hero or a genius instead of araitor, and that will be still more unjust. He is an honest andery punctilious German."
	"And they say he's a skillful commander," rejoined Pierre.
	"I don't understand what is meant by 'a skillful commander,'"eplied Prince Andrew ironically.
	"A skillful commander?" replied Pierre. "Why, one who foresees allontingencies... and foresees the adversary's intentions."
	"But that's impossible," said Prince Andrew as if it were a matterettled long ago.
	Pierre looked at him in surprise.
	"And yet they say that war is like a game of chess?" he remarked.
	"Yes," replied Prince Andrew, "but with this little difference, thatn chess you may think over each move as long as you please and areot limited for time, and with this difference too, that a knight islways stronger than a pawn, and two pawns are always stronger thanne, while in war a battalion is sometimes stronger than a divisionnd sometimes weaker than a company. The relative strength of bodiesf troops can never be known to anyone. Believe me," he went on, "ifhings depended on arrangements made by the staff, I should be thereaking arrangements, but instead of that I have the honor to serveere in the regiment with these gentlemen, and I consider that on usomorrow's battle will depend and not on those others.... Successever depends, and never will depend, on position, or equipment, orven on numbers, and least of all on position."
	"But on what then?"
	"On the feeling that is in me and in him," he pointed to Timokhin,and in each soldier."
	Prince Andrew glanced at Timokhin, who looked at his commander inlarm and bewilderment. In contrast to his former reticent taciturnityrince Andrew now seemed excited. He could apparently not refrain fromxpressing the thoughts that had suddenly occurred to him.
	"A battle is won by those who firmly resolve to win it! Why did weose the battle at Austerlitz? The French losses were almost equalo ours, but very early we said to ourselves that we were losing theattle, and we did lose it. And we said so because we had nothing toight for there, we wanted to get away from the battlefield as soon ase could. 'We've lost, so let us run,' and we ran. If we had notaid that till the evening, heaven knows what might not have happened.ut tomorrow we shan't say it! You talk about our position, the leftlank weak and the right flank too extended," he went on. "That'sll nonsense, there's nothing of the kind. But what awaits usomorrow? A hundred million most diverse chances which will be decidedn the instant by the fact that our men or theirs run or do not run,nd that this man or that man is killed, but all that is being done atresent is only play. The fact is that those men with whom you haveidden round the position not only do not help matters, but hinder.hey are only concerned with their own petty interests."
	"At such a moment?" said Pierre reproachfully.
	"At such a moment!" Prince Andrew repeated. "To them it is only aoment affording opportunities to undermine a rival and obtain anxtra cross or ribbon. For me tomorrow means this: a Russian army of aundred thousand and a French army of a hundred thousand have met toight, and the thing is that these two hundred thousand men will fightnd the side that fights more fiercely and spares itself least willin. And if you like I will tell you that whatever happens andhatever muddles those at the top may make, we shall win tomorrow'sattle. Tomorrow, happen what may, we shall win!"
	"There now, your excellency! That's the truth, the real truth," saidimokhin. "Who would spare himself now? The soldiers in myattalion, believe me, wouldn't drink their vodka! 'It's not the dayor that!' they say."
	All were silent. The officers rose. Prince Andrew went out of thehed with them, giving final orders to the adjutant. After they hadone Pierre approached Prince Andrew and was about to start aonversation when they heard the clatter of three horses' hoofs on theoad not far from the shed, and looking in that direction Princendrew recognized Wolzogen and Clausewitz accompanied by a Cossack.hey rode close by continuing to converse, and Prince Andrewnvoluntarily heard these words:
	"Der Krieg muss in Raum verlegt werden. Der Ansicht kann ich nichtenug Preis geben,"* said one of them.
	*"The war must be extended widely. I cannot sufficiently commendhat view."
	"Oh, ja," said the other, "der Zweck ist nur den Feind zu schwachen,o kann man gewiss nicht den Verlust der Privat-Personen in Achtungehmen."*
	*"Oh, yes, the only aim is to weaken the enemy, so of course oneannot take into account the loss of private individuals."
	"Oh, no," agreed the other.
	"Extend widely!" said Prince Andrew with an angry snort, when theyad ridden past. "In that 'extend' were my father, son, and sister, atald Hills. That's all the same to him! That's what I was saying toou- those German gentlemen won't win the battle tomorrow but willnly make all the mess they can, because they have nothing in theirerman heads but theories not worth an empty eggshell and haven't inheir hearts the one thing needed tomorrow- that which Timokhin has.hey have yielded up all Europe to him, and have now come to teach us.ine teachers!" and again his voice grew shrill.
	"So you think we shall win tomorrow's battle?" asked Pierre.
	"Yes, yes," answered Prince Andrew absently. "One thing I would dof I had the power," he began again, "I would not take prisoners.hy take prisoners? It's chivalry! The French have destroyed my homend are on their way to destroy Moscow, they have outraged and areutraging me every moment. They are my enemies. In my opinion they arell criminals. And so thinks Timokhin and the whole army. Theyhould be executed! Since they are my foes they cannot be myriends, whatever may have been said at Tilsit."
	"Yes, yes," muttered Pierre, looking with shining eyes at Princendrew. "I quite agree with you!"
	The question that had perturbed Pierre on the Mozhaysk hill andll that day now seemed to him quite clear and completely solved. Heow understood the whole meaning and importance of this war and of thempending battle. All he had seen that day, all the significant andtern expressions on the faces he had seen in passing, were lit up forim by a new light. He understood that latent heat (as they say inhysics) of patriotism which was present in all these men he had seen,nd this explained to him why they all prepared for death calmly,nd as it were lightheartedly.
	"Not take prisoners," Prince Andrew continued: "That by itself woulduite change the whole war and make it less cruel. As it is we havelayed at war- that's what's vile! We play at magnanimity and all thattuff. Such magnanimity and sensibility are like the magnanimity andensibility of a lady who faints when she sees a calf being killed:he is so kind-hearted that she can't look at blood, but enjoys eatinghe calf served up with sauce. They talk to us of the rules of war, ofhivalry, of flags of truce, of mercy to the unfortunate and so on.t's all rubbish! I saw chivalry and flags of truce in 1805; theyumbugged us and we humbugged them. They plunder other people'souses, issue false paper money, and worst of all they kill myhildren and my father, and then talk of rules of war andagnanimity to foes! Take no prisoners, but kill and be killed! He whoas come to this as I have through the same sufferings..."
	Prince Andrew, who had thought it was all the same to him whether orot Moscow was taken as Smolensk had been, was suddenly checked in hispeech by an unexpected cramp in his throat. He paced up and down aew times in silence, but his eyes glittered feverishly and his lipsuivered as he began speaking.
	"If there was none of this magnanimity in war, we should go to warnly when it was worth while going to certain death, as now. Thenhere would not be war because Paul Ivanovich had offended Michaelvanovich. And when there was a war, like this one, it would be war!nd then the determination of the troops would be quite different.hen all these Westphalians and Hessians whom Napoleon is leadingould not follow him into Russia, and we should not go to fight inustria and Prussia without knowing why. War is not courtesy but theost horrible thing in life; and we ought to understand that and notlay at war. We ought to accept this terrible necessity sternly anderiously. It all lies in that: get rid of falsehood and let war bear and not a game. As it is now, war is the favorite pastime of thedle and frivolous. The military calling is the most highly honored.
	"But what is war? What is needed for success in warfare? What arehe habits of the military? The aim of war is murder; the methods ofar are spying, treachery, and their encouragement, the ruin of aountry's inhabitants, robbing them or stealing to provision the army,nd fraud and falsehood termed military craft. The habits of theilitary class are the absence of freedom, that is, discipline,dleness, ignorance, cruelty, debauchery, and drunkenness. And inpite of all this it is the highest class, respected by everyone.ll the kings, except the Chinese, wear military uniforms, and heho kills most people receives the highest rewards.
	"They meet, as we shall meet tomorrow, to murder one another; theyill and maim tens of thousands, and then have thanksgiving servicesor having killed so many people (they even exaggerate the number),nd they announce a victory, supposing that the more people theyave killed the greater their achievement. How does God above lookt them and hear them?" exclaimed Prince Andrew in a shrill,iercing voice. "Ah, my friend, it has of late become hard for me toive. I see that I have begun to understand too much. And it doesn'to for man to taste of the tree of knowledge of good and evil....h, well, it's not for long!" he added.
	"However, you're sleepy, and it's time for me to sleep. Go back toorki!" said Prince Andrew suddenly.
	"Oh no!" Pierre replied, looking at Prince Andrew with frightened,ompassionate eyes.
	"Go, go! Before a battle one must have one's sleep out," repeatedrince Andrew.
	He came quickly up to Pierre and embraced and kissed him."Good-by, be off!" he shouted. "Whether we meet again or not..."nd turning away hurriedly he entered the shed.
	It was already dark, and Pierre could not make out whether thexpression of Prince Andrew's face was angry or tender.
	For some time he stood in silence considering whether he shouldollow him or go away. "No, he does not want it!" Pierre concluded.And I know that this is our last meeting!" He sighed deeply andode back to Gorki.
	On re-entering the shed Prince Andrew lay down on a rug, but heould not sleep.
	He closed his eyes. One picture succeeded another in hismagination. On one of them he dwelt long and joyfully. He vividlyecalled an evening in Petersburg. Natasha with animated and excitedace was telling him how she had gone to look for mushrooms therevious summer and had lost her way in the big forest. Shencoherently described the depths of the forest, her feelings, and aalk with a beekeeper she met, and constantly interrupted her story toay: "No, I can't! I'm not telling it right; no, you don'tnderstand," though he encouraged her by saying that he didnderstand, and he really had understood all she wanted to say. Butatasha was not satisfied with her own words: she felt that they didot convey the passionately poetic feeling she had experienced thatay and wished to convey. "He was such a delightful old man, and itas so dark in the forest... and he had such kind... No, I can'tescribe it," she had said, flushed and excited. Prince Andrewmiled now the same happy smile as then when he had looked into heryes. "I understood her," he thought. "I not only understood her,ut it was just that inner, spiritual force, that sincerity, thatrankness of soul- that very soul of hers which seemed to beettered by her body- it was that soul I loved in her... loved sotrongly and happily..." and suddenly he remembered how his love hadnded. "He did not need anything of that kind. He neither saw nornderstood anything of the sort. He only saw in her a pretty and freshoung girl, with whom he did not deign to unite his fate. And I?...nd he is still alive and gay!"
	Prince Andrew jumped up as if someone had burned him, and againegan pacing up and down in front of the shed.BK10|CH26
	CHAPTER XXVI
	On August 25, the eve of the battle of Borodino, M. de Beausset,refect of the French Emperor's palace, arrived at Napoleon's quarterst Valuevo with Colonel Fabvier, the former from Paris and theatter from Madrid.
	Donning his court uniform, M. de Beausset ordered a box he hadrought for the Emperor to be carried before him and entered the firstompartment of Napoleon's tent, where he began opening the box whileonversing with Napoleon's aides-de-camp who surrounded him.
	Fabvier, not entering the tent, remained at the entrance talkingo some generals of his acquaintance.
	The Emperor Napoleon had not yet left his bedroom and wasinishing his toilet. Slightly snorting and grunting, he presented nowis back and now his plump hairy chest to the brush with which hisalet was rubbing him down. Another valet, with his finger over theouth of a bottle, was sprinkling Eau de Cologne on the Emperor'sampered body with an expression which seemed to say that he alonenew where and how much Eau de Cologne should be sprinkled. Napoleon'short hair was wet and matted on the forehead, but his face, thoughuffy and yellow, expressed physical satisfaction. "Go on, harder,o on!" he muttered to the valet who was rubbing him, slightlywitching and grunting. An aide-de-camp, who had entered the bedroomo report to the Emperor the number of prisoners taken inesterday's action, was standing by the door after delivering hisessage, awaiting permission to withdraw. Napoleon, frowning, lookedt him from under his brows.
	"No prisoners!" said he, repeating the aide-de-camp's words. "Theyre forcing us to exterminate them. So much the worse for theussian army.... Go on... harder, harder!" he muttered, hunching hisack and presenting his fat shoulders.
	"All right. Let Monsieur de Beausset enter, and Fabvier too," heaid, nodding to the aide-de-camp.
	"Yes, sire," and the aide-de-camp disappeared through the door ofhe tent.
	Two valets rapidly dressed His Majesty, and wearing the blue uniformf the Guards he went with firm quick steps to the reception room.
	De Beausset's hands meanwhile were busily engaged arranging theresent he had brought from the Empress, on two chairs directly inront of the entrance. But Napoleon had dressed and come out with suchnexpected rapidity that he had not time to finish arranging theurprise.
	Napoleon noticed at once what they were about and guessed thathey were not ready. He did not wish to deprive them of the pleasuref giving him a surprise, so he pretended not to see de Beausset andalled Fabvier to him, listening silently and with a stern frown tohat Fabvier told him of the heroism and devotion of his troopsighting at Salamanca, at the other end of Europe, with but onehought- to be worthy of their Emperor- and but one fear- to fail tolease him. The result of that battle had been deplorable. Napoleonade ironic remarks during Fabvier's account, as if he had notxpected that matters could go otherwise in his absence.
	"I must make up for that in Moscow," said Napoleon. "I'll see youater," he added, and summoned de Beausset, who by that time hadrepared the surprise, having placed something on the chairs andovered it with a cloth.
	De Beausset bowed low, with that courtly French bow which only theld retainers of the Bourbons knew how to make, and approached him,resenting an envelope.
	Napoleon turned to him gaily and pulled his ear.
	"You have hurried here. I am very glad. Well, what is Paris saying?"e asked, suddenly changing his former stern expression for a mostordial tone.
	"Sire, all Paris regrets your absence," replied de Beausset as wasroper.
	But though Napoleon knew that de Beausset had to say something ofhis kind, and though in his lucid moments he knew it was untrue, heas pleased to hear it from him. Again he honored him by touchingis ear.
	"I am very sorry to have made you travel so far," said he.
	"Sire, I expected nothing less than to find you at the gates ofoscow," replied de Beausset.
	Napoleon smiled and, lifting his head absentmindedly, glanced to theight. An aide-de-camp approached with gliding steps and offered him aold snuffbox, which he took.
	"Yes, it has happened luckily for you," he said, raising the opennuffbox to his nose. "You are fond of travel, and in three days youill see Moscow. You surely did not expect to see that Asiaticapital. You will have a pleasant journey."
	De Beausset bowed gratefully at this regard for his taste for travelof which he had not till then been aware).
	"Ha, what's this?" asked Napoleon, noticing that all the courtiersere looking at something concealed under a cloth.
	With courtly adroitness de Beausset half turned and withouturning his back to the Emperor retired two steps, twitching off theloth at the same time, and said:
	"A present to Your Majesty from the Empress."
	It was a portrait, painted in bright colors by Gerard, of the sonorne to Napoleon by the daughter of the Emperor of Austria, the boyhom for some reason everyone called "The King of Rome."
	A very pretty curly-headed boy with a look of the Christ in theistine Madonna was depicted playing at stick and ball. The ballepresented the terrestrial globe and the stick in his other hand acepter.
	Though it was not clear what the artist meant to express byepicting the so-called King of Rome spiking the earth with a stick,he allegory apparently seemed to Napoleon, as it had done to allho had seen it in Paris, quite clear and very pleasing.
	"The King of Rome!" he said, pointing to the portrait with araceful gesture. "Admirable!"
	With the natural capacity of an Italian for changing thexpression of his face at will, he drew nearer to the portrait andssumed a look of pensive tenderness. He felt that what he now saidnd did would be historical, and it seemed to him that it would now beest for him- whose grandeur enabled his son to play stick and ballith the terrestrial globe- to show, in contrast to that grandeur, theimplest paternal tenderness. His eyes grew dim, he moved forward,lanced round at a chair (which seemed to place itself under him), andat down on it before the portrait. At a single gesture from himveryone went out on tiptoe, leaving the great man to himself andis emotion.
	Having sat still for a while he touched- himself not knowing why-he thick spot of paint representing the highest light in theortrait, rose, and recalled de Beausset and the officer on duty. Herdered the portrait to be carried outside his tent, that the Olduard, stationed round it, might not be deprived of the pleasure ofeeing the King of Rome, the son and heir of their adored monarch.
	And while he was doing M. de Beausset the honor of breakfasting withim, they heard, as Napoleon had anticipated, the rapturous cries ofhe officers and men of the Old Guard who had run up to see theortrait.
	"Vive l'Empereur! Vive le roi de Rome! Vive l'Empereur!" camehose ecstatic cries.
	After breakfast Napoleon in de Beausset's presence dictated hisrder of the day to the army.
	"Short and energetic!" he remarked when he had read over theroclamation which he had dictated straight off without corrections.t ran:
	Soldiers! This is the battle you have so longed for. Victory dependsn you. It is essential for us; it will give us all we need:omfortable quarters and a speedy return to our country. Behave as youid at Austerlitz, Friedland, Vitebsk, and Smolensk. Let ouremotest posterity recall your achievements this day with pride. Lett be said of each of you: "He was in the great battle before Moscow!"
	"Before Moscow!" repeated Napoleon, and inviting M. de Beausset, whoas so fond of travel, to accompany him on his ride, he went out ofhe tent to where the horses stood saddled.
	"Your Majesty is too kind!" replied de Beausset to the invitation toccompany the Emperor; he wanted to sleep, did not know how to ridend was afraid of doing so.
	But Napoleon nodded to the traveler, and de Beausset had to mount.hen Napoleon came out of the tent the shouting of the Guards beforeis son's portrait grew still louder. Napoleon frowned.
	"Take him away!" he said, pointing with a gracefully majesticesture to the portrait. "It is too soon for him to see a field ofattle."
	De Beausset closed his eyes, bowed his head, and sighed deeply, tondicate how profoundly he valued and comprehended the Emperor'sords.BK10|CH27
	CHAPTER XXVII
	On the twenty-fifth of August, so his historians tell us, Napoleonpent the whole day on horseback inspecting the locality,onsidering plans submitted to him by his marshals, and personallyiving commands to his generals.
	The original line of the Russian forces along the river Kolochaad been dislocated by the capture of the Shevardino Redoubt on thewenty-fourth, and part of the line- the left flank- had been drawnack. That part of the line was not entrenched and in front of ithe ground was more open and level than elsewhere. It was evident tonyone, military or not, that it was here the French should attack. Itould seem that not much consideration was needed to reach thisonclusion, nor any particular care or trouble on the part of themperor and his marshals, nor was there any need of that special andupreme quality called genius that people are so apt to ascribe toapoleon; yet the historians who described the event later and the menho then surrounded Napoleon, and he himself, thought otherwise.
	Napoleon rode over the plain and surveyed the locality with arofound air and in silence, nodded with approval or shook his headubiously, and without communicating to the generals around him therofound course of ideas which guided his decisions merely gave themis final conclusions in the form of commands. Having listened to auggestion from Davout, who was now called Prince d'Eckmuhl, to turnhe Russian left wing, Napoleon said it should not be done, withoutxplaining why not. To a proposal made by General Campan (who was tottack the fleches) to lead his division through the woods, Napoleongreed, though the so-called Duke of Elchingen (Ney) ventured toemark that a movement through the woods was dangerous and mightisorder the division.
	Having inspected the country opposite the Shevardino Redoubt,apoleon pondered a little in silence and then indicated the spotshere two batteries should be set up by the morrow to act againsthe Russian entrenchments, and the places where, in line with them,he field artillery should be placed.
	After giving these and other commands he returned to his tent, andhe dispositions for the battle were written down from his dictation.
	These dispositions, of which the French historians write withnthusiasm and other historians with profound respect, were asollows:
	At dawn the two new batteries established during the night on thelain occupied by the Prince d'Eckmuhl will open fire on thepposing batteries of the enemy.
	At the same time the commander of the artillery of the 1st Corps,eneral Pernetti, with thirty cannon of Campan's division and allhe howitzers of Dessaix's and Friant's divisions, will moveorward, open fire, and overwhelm with shellfire the enemy'sattery, against which will operate:
	        24 guns of the artillery of the Guards
	        30 guns of Campan's division
	and      8 guns of Friant's and Dessaix's divisions
	        --
	in all  62 guns.
	The commander of the artillery of the 3rd Corps, General Fouche,ill place the howitzers of the 3rd and 8th Corps, sixteen in all,n the flanks of the battery that is to bombard the entrenchment onhe left, which will have forty guns in all directed against it.
	General Sorbier must be ready at the first order to advance with allhe howitzers of the Guard's artillery against either one or otherf the entrenchments.
	During the cannonade Prince Poniatowski is to advance through theood on the village and turn the enemy's position.
	General Campan will move through the wood to seize the firstortification.
	After the advance has begun in this manner, orders will be givenn accordance with the enemy's movements.
	The cannonade on the left flank will begin as soon as the guns ofhe right wing are heard. The sharpshooters of Morand's division andf the vice-King's division will open a heavy fire on seeing thettack commence on the right wing.
	The vice-King will occupy the village and cross by its threeridges, advancing to the same heights as Morand's and Gibrard'sivisions, which under his leadership will be directed against theedoubt and come into line with the rest of the forces.
	All this must be done in good order (le tout se fera avec ordre etethode) as far as possible retaining troops in reserve.
	   The Imperial Camp near Mozhaysk,
	   September, 6, 1812.
	These dispositions, which are very obscure and confused if onellows oneself to regard the arrangements without religious awe of hisenius, related to Napoleon's orders to deal with four points- fourifferent orders. Not one of these was, or could be, carried out.
	In the disposition it is said first that the batteries placed on thepot chosen by Napoleon, with the guns of Pernetti and Fouche; whichere to come in line with them, 102 guns in all, were to open fire andhower shells on the Russian fleches and redoubts. This could not beone, as from the spots selected by Napoleon the projectiles did notarry to the Russian works, and those 102 guns shot into the air untilhe nearest commander, contrary to Napoleon's instructions, moved themorward.
	The second order was that Poniatowski, moving to the village throughhe wood, should turn the Russian left flank. This could not be donend was not done, because Poniatowski, advancing on the villagehrough the wood, met Tuchkov there barring his way, and could not andid not turn the Russian position.
	The third order was: General Campan will move through the wood toeize the first fortification. General Campan's division did not seizehe first fortification but was driven back, for on emerging fromhe wood it had to reform under grapeshot, of which Napoleon wasnaware.
	The fourth order was: The vice-King will occupy the villageBorodino) and cross by its three bridges, advancing to the sameeights as Morand's and Gdrard's divisions (for whose movements noirections are given), which under his leadership will be directedgainst the redoubt and come into line with the rest of the forces.
	As far as one can make out, not so much from this unintelligibleentence as from the attempts the vice-King made to execute the ordersiven him, he was to advance from the left through Borodino to theedoubt while the divisions of Morand and Gerard were to advanceimultaneously from the front.
	All this, like the other parts of the disposition, was not and couldot be executed. After passing through Borodino the vice-King wasriven back to the Kolocha and could get no farther; while theivisions of Morand and Gerard did not take the redoubt but wereriven back, and the redoubt was only taken at the end of the battley the cavalry (a thing probably unforeseen and not heard of byapoleon). So not one of the orders in the disposition was, or coulde, executed. But in the disposition it is said that, after theight has commenced in this manner, orders will be given in accordanceith the enemy's movements, and so it might be supposed that allecessary arrangements would be made by Napoleon during the battle.ut this was not and could not be done, for during the whole battleapoleon was so far away that, as appeared later, he could not knowhe course of the battle and not one of his orders during the fightould be executed.BK10|CH28
	CHAPTER XXVIII
	Many historians say that the French did not win the battle oforodino because Napoleon had a cold, and that if he had not had aold the orders he gave before and during the battle would have beentill more full of genius and Russia would have been lost and the facef the world have been changed. To historians who believe thatussia was shaped by the will of one man- Peter the Great- and thatrance from a republic became an empire and French armies went toussia at the will of one man- Napoleon- to say that Russia remained aower because Napoleon had a bad cold on the twenty-fourth of Augustay seem logical and convincing.
	If it had depended on Napoleon's will to fight or not to fight theattle of Borodino, and if this or that other arrangement dependedn his will, then evidently a cold affecting the manifestation ofis will might have saved Russia, and consequently the valet whomitted to bring Napoleon his waterproof boots on the twenty-fourthould have been the savior of Russia. Along that line of thoughtuch a deduction is indubitable, as indubitable as the deductionoltaire made in jest (without knowing what he was jesting at) when heaw that the Massacre of St. Bartholomew was due to Charles IX'stomach being deranged. But to men who do not admit that Russia wasormed by the will of one man, Peter I, or that the French Empireas formed and the war with Russia begun by the will of one man,apoleon, that argument seems not merely untrue and irrational, butontrary to all human reality. To the question of what causes historicvents another answer presents itself, namely, that the course ofuman events is predetermined from on high- depends on the coincidencef the wills of all who take part in the events, and that a Napoleon'snfluence on the course of these events is purely external andictitious.
	Strange as at first glance it may seem to suppose that theassacre of St. Bartholomew was not due to Charles IX's will, thoughe gave the order for it and thought it was done as a result of thatrder; and strange as it may seem to suppose that the slaughter ofighty thousand men at Borodino was not due to Napoleon's will, thoughe ordered the commencement and conduct of the battle and thought itas done because he ordered it; strange as these suppositionsppear, yet human dignity- which tells me that each of us is, if notore at least not less a man than the great Napoleon- demands thecceptance of that solution of the question, and historicnvestigation abundantly confirms it.
	At the battle of Borodino Napoleon shot at no one and killed no one.hat was all done by the soldiers. Therefore it was not he whoilled people.
	The French soldiers went to kill and be killed at the battle oforodino not because of Napoleon's orders but by their own volition.he whole army- French, Italian, German, Polish, and Dutch- hungry,agged, and weary of the campaign, felt at the sight of an armylocking their road to Moscow that the wine was drawn and must berunk. Had Napoleon then forbidden them to fight the Russians, theyould have killed him and have proceeded to fight the Russians becauset was inevitable.
	When they heard Napoleon's proclamation offering them, asompensation for mutilation and death, the words of posterity aboutheir having been in the battle before Moscow, they cried "Vive'Empereur!" just as they had cried "Vive l'Empereur!" at the sight ofhe portrait of the boy piercing the terrestrial globe with a toytick, and just as they would have cried "Vive l'Empereur!" at anyonsense that might be told them. There was nothing left for them too but cry "Vive l'Empereur!" and go to fight, in order to get foodnd rest as conquerors in Moscow. So it was not because ofapoleon's commands that they killed their fellow men.
	And it was not Napoleon who directed the course of the battle, forone of his orders were executed and during the battle he did not knowhat was going on before him. So the way in which these peopleilled one another was not decided by Napoleon's will but occurredndependently of him, in accord with the will of hundreds of thousandsf people who took part in the common action. It only seemed toapoleon that it all took place by his will. And so the questionhether he had or had not a cold has no more historic interest thanhe cold of the least of the transport soldiers.
	Moreover, the assertion made by various writers that his cold washe cause of his dispositions not being as well planned as on formerccasions, and of his orders during the battle not being as good asreviously, is quite baseless, which again shows that Napoleon'sold on the twenty-sixth of August was unimportant.
	The dispositions cited above are not at all worse, but are evenetter, than previous dispositions by which he had won victories.is pseudo-orders during the battle were also no worse thanormerly, but much the same as usual. These dispositions and ordersnly seem worse than previous ones because the battle of Borodinoas the first Napoleon did not win. The profoundest and most excellentispositions and orders seem very bad, and every learned militaristriticizes them with looks oks importance, when they relate to aattle that has been lost, and the very worst dispositions andrders seem very good, and serious people fill whole volumes toemonstrate their merits, when they relate to a battle that has beenon.
	The dispositions drawn up by Weyrother for the battle ofusterlitz were a model of perfection for that kind of composition,ut still they were criticized- criticized for their veryerfection, for their excessive minuteness.
	Napoleon at the battle of Borodino fulfilled his office asepresentative of authority as well as, and even better than, at otherattles. He did nothing harmful to the progress of the battle; henclined to the most reasonable opinions, he made no confusion, didot contradict himself, did not get frightened or run away from theield of battle, but with his great tact and military experiencearried out his role of appearing to command, calmly and with dignity.BK10|CH29
	CHAPTER XXIX
	On returning from a second inspection of the lines, Napoleonemarked:
	"The chessmen are set up, the game will begin tomorrow!"
	Having ordered punch and summoned de Beausset, he began to talk toim about Paris and about some changes he meant to make the Empress'ousehold, surprising the prefect by his memory of minute detailselating to the court.
	He showed an interest in trifles, joked about de Beausset's lovef travel, and chatted carelessly, as a famous, self-confident surgeonho knows his job does when turning up his sleeves and putting onis apron while a patient is being strapped to the operating table.The matter is in my hands and is clear and definite in my head.hen the times comes to set to work I shall do it as no one elseould, but now I can jest, and the more I jest and the calmer I am theore tranquil and confident you ought to be, and the more amazed at myenius."
	Having finished his second glass of punch, Napoleon went to restefore the serious business which, he considered, awaited him nextay. He was so much interested in that task that he was unable toleep, and in spite of his cold which had grown worse from theampness of the evening, he went into the large division of the tentt three o'clock in the morning, loudly blowing his nose. He askedhether the Russians had not withdrawn, and was told that thenemy's fires were still in the same places. He nodded approval.
	The adjutant in attendance came into the tent.
	"Well, Rapp, do you think we shall do good business today?" Napoleonsked him.
	"Without doubt, sire," replied Rapp.
	Napoleon looked at him.
	"Do you remember, sire, what you did me the honor to say atmolensk?" continued Rapp. "The wine is drawn and must be drunk."
	Napoleon frowned and sat silent for a long time leaning his headn his hand.
	"This poor army!" he suddenly remarked. "It has diminished greatlyince Smolensk. Fortune is frankly a courtesan, Rapp. I have alwaysaid so and I am beginning to experience it. But the Guards, Rapp, theuards are intact?" he remarked interrogatively.
	"Yes, sire," replied Rapp.
	Napoleon took a lozenge, put it in his mouth, and glanced at hisatch. He was not sleepy and it was still not nearly morning. It wasmpossible to give further orders for the sake of killing time, forhe orders had all been given and were now being executed.
	"Have the biscuits and rice been served out to the regiments ofhe Guards?" asked Napoleon sternly.
	"Yes, sire."
	"The rice too?"
	Rapp replied that he had given the Emperor's order about the rice,ut Napoleon shook his head in dissatisfaction as if not believinghat his order had been executed. An attendant came in with punch.apoleon ordered another glass to be brought for Rapp, and silentlyipped his own.
	"I have neither taste nor smell," he remarked, sniffing at hislass. "This cold is tiresome. They talk about medicine- what is theood of medicine when it can't cure a cold! Corvisart gave me theseozenges but they don't help at all. What can doctors cure? Onean't cure anything. Our body is a machine for living. It is organizedor that, it is its nature. Let life go on in it unhindered and let itefend itself, it will do more than if you paralyze it byncumbering it with remedies. Our body is like a perfect watch thathould go for a certain time; watchmaker cannot open it, he can onlydjust it by fumbling, and that blindfold.... Yes, our body is just machine for living, that is all."
	And having entered on the path of definition, of which he wasond, Napoleon suddenly and unexpectedly gave a new one.
	"Do you know, Rapp, what military art is?" asked he. "It is thert of being stronger than the enemy at a given moment. That's all."
	Rapp made no reply.
	"Tomorrow we shall have to deal with Kutuzov!" said Napoleon. "Wehall see! Do you remember at Braunau he commanded an army for threeeeks and did not once mount a horse to inspect hisntrenchments.... We shall see!"
	He looked at his watch. It was still only four o'clock. He did noteel sleepy. The punch was finished and there was still nothing to do.e rose, walked to and fro, put on a warm overcoat and a hat, and wentut of the tent. The night was dark and damp, a scarcely perceptibleoisture was descending from above. Near by, the campfires wereimly burning among the French Guards, and in the distance those ofhe Russian line shone through the smoke. The weather was calm, andhe rustle and tramp of the French troops already beginning to move toake up their positions were clearly audible.
	Napoleon walked about in front of his tent, looked at the firesnd listened to these sounds, and as he was passing a tall guardsmann a shaggy cap, who was standing sentinel before his tent and hadrawn himself up like a black pillar at sight of the Emperor, Napoleontopped in front of him.
	"What year did you enter the service?" he asked with thatffectation of military bluntness and geniality with which he alwaysddressed the soldiers.
	The man answered the question.
	"Ah! One of the old ones! Has your regiment had its rice?"
	"It has, Your Majesty."
	Napoleon nodded and walked away.
	At half-past five Napoleon rode to the village of Shevardino.
	It was growing light, the sky was clearing, only a single clouday in the east. The abandoned campfires were burning themselves outn the faint morning light.
	On the right a single deep report of a cannon resounded and diedway in the prevailing silence. Some minutes passed. A second and ahird report shook the air, then a fourth and a fifth boomedolemnly near by on the right.
	The first shots had not yet ceased to reverberate before others rangut and yet more were heard mingling with and overtaking one another.
	Napoleon with his suite rode up to the Shevardino Redoubt where heismounted. The game had begun.BK10|CH30
	CHAPTER XXX
	On returning to Gorki after having seen Prince Andrew, Pierrerdered his groom to get the horses ready and to call him early in theorning, and then immediately fell asleep behind a partition in aorner Boris had given up to him.
	Before he was thoroughly awake next morning everybody had alreadyeft the hut. The panes were rattling in the little windows and hisroom was shaking him.
	"Your excellency! Your excellency! Your excellency!" he keptepeating pertinaciously while he shook Pierre by the shoulder withoutooking at him, having apparently lost hope of getting him to wake up.
	"What? Has it begun? Is it time?" Pierre asked, waking up.
	"Hear the firing," said the groom, a discharged soldier. "All theentlemen have gone out, and his Serene Highness himself rode pastong ago."
	Pierre dressed hastily and ran out to the porch. Outside all wasright, fresh, dewy, and cheerful. The sun, just bursting forth fromehind a cloud that had concealed it, was shining, with rays stillalf broken by the clouds, over the roofs of the street opposite, onhe dew-besprinkled dust of the road, on the walls of the houses, onhe windows, the fence, and on Pierre's horses standing before theut. The roar of guns sounded more distinct outside. An adjutantccompanied by a Cossack passed by at a sharp trot.
	"It's time, Count; it's time!" cried the adjutant.
	Telling the groom to follow him with the horses, Pierre went downhe street to the knoll from which he had looked at the field ofattle the day before. A crowd of military men was assembled there,embers of the staff could be heard conversing in French, andutuzov's gray head in a white cap with a red band was visible, hisray nape sunk between his shoulders. He was looking through a fieldlass down the highroad before him.
	Mounting the steps to the knoll Pierre looked at the scene beforeim, spellbound by beauty. It was the same panorama he had admiredrom that spot the day before, but now the whole place was full ofroops and covered by smoke clouds from the guns, and the slantingays of the bright sun, rising slightly to the left behind Pierre,ast upon it through the clear morning air penetrating streaks ofosy, golden tinted light and long dark shadows. The forest at thearthest extremity of the panorama seemed carved in some precioustone of a yellowish-green color; its undulating outline wasilhouetted against the horizon and was pierced beyond Valuevo byhe Smolensk highroad crowded with troops. Nearer at hand glitteredolden cornfields interspersed with copses. There were troops to beeen everywhere, in front and to the right and left. All this wasivid, majestic, and unexpected; but what impressed Pierre most of allas the view of the battlefield itself, of Borodino and the hollows onoth sides of the Kolocha.
	Above the Kolocha, in Borodino and on both sides of it, especiallyo the left where the Voyna flowing between its marshy banks fallsnto the Kolocha, a mist had spread which seemed to melt, to dissolve,nd to become translucent when the brilliant sun appeared andagically colored and outlined everything. The smoke of the gunsingled with this mist, and over the whole expanse and through thatist the rays of the morning sun were reflected, flashing back likeightning from the water, from the dew, and from the bayonets of theroops crowded together by the riverbanks and in Borodino. A whitehurch could be seen through the mist, and here and there the roofs ofuts in Borodino as well as dense masses of soldiers, or greenmmunition chests and ordnance. And all this moved, or seemed to move,s the smoke and mist spread out over the whole space. Just as inhe mist-enveloped hollow near Borodino, so along the entire lineutside and above it and especially in the woods and fields to theeft, in the valleys and on the summits of the high ground, cloudsf powder smoke seemed continually to spring up out of nothing, nowingly, now several at a time, some translucent, others dense,hich, swelling, growing, rolling, and blending, extended over thehole expanse.
	These puffs of smoke and (strange to say) the sound of sound ofhe firing produced the chief beauty of the spectacle.
	"Puff!"- suddenly a round compact cloud of smoke was seen mergingrom violet into gray and milky white, and "boom!" came the report aecond later.
	"Puff! puff!"- and two clouds arose pushing one another and blendingogether; and "boom, boom!" came the sounds confirming what the eyead seen.
	Pierre glanced round at the first cloud, which he had seen as aound compact ball, and in its place already were balloons of smokeloating to one side, and- "puff" (with a pause)- "puff, puff!"hree and then four more appeared and then from each, with the samenterval- "boom- boom, boom!" came the fine, firm, precise sounds ineply. It seemed as if those smoke clouds sometimes ran andometimes stood still while woods, fields, and glittering bayonets ranast them. From the left, over fields and bushes, those large balls ofmoke were continually appearing followed by their solemn reports,hile nearer still, in the hollows and woods, there burst from theuskets small cloudlets that had no time to become balls, but hadheir little echoes in just the same way. "Trakh-ta-ta-takh!" came therequent crackle of musketry, but it was irregular and feeble inomparison with the reports of the cannon.
	Pierre wished to be there with that smoke, those shining bayonets,hat movement, and those sounds. He turned to look at Kutuzov andis suite, to compare his impressions with those of others. Theyere all looking at the field of battle as he was, and, as it seemedo him, with the same feelings. All their faces were now shiningith that latent warmth of feeling Pierre had noticed the day beforend had fully understood after his talk with Prince Andrew.
	"Go, my dear fellow, go... and Christ be with you!" Kutuzov wasaying to a general who stood beside him, not taking his eye fromhe battlefield.
	Having received this order the general passed by Pierre on his wayown the knoll.
	"To the crossing!" said the general coldly and sternly in reply tone of the staff who asked where he was going.
	"I'll go there too, I too!" thought Pierre, and followed theeneral.
	The general mounted a horse a Cossack had brought him. Pierre wento his groom who was holding his horses and, asking which was theuietest, clambered onto it, seized it by the mane, and turning outis toes pressed his heels against its sides and, feeling that hispectacles were slipping off but unable to let go of the mane andeins, he galloped after the general, causing the staff officers tomile as they watched him from the knoll.BK10|CH31
	CHAPTER XXXI
	Having descended the hill the general after whom Pierre wasalloping turned sharply to the left, and Pierre, losing sight of him,alloped in among some ranks of infantry marching ahead of him. Heried to pass either in front of them or to the right or left, buthere were soldiers everywhere, all with expression and busy with somenseen but evidently important task. They all gazed with the sameissatisfied and inquiring expression at this stout man in a whiteat, who for some unknown reason threatened to trample them underis horse's hoofs.
	"Why ride into the middle of the battalion?" one of them shoutedt him.
	Another prodded his horse with the butt end of a musket, and Pierre,ending over his saddlebow and hardly able to control his shyingorse, galloped ahead of the soldiers where there was a free space.
	There was a bridge ahead of him, where other soldiers stoodiring. Pierre rode up to them. Without being aware of it he hadome to the bridge across the Kolocha between Gorki and Borodino,hich the French (having occupied Borodino) were attacking in theirst phase of the battle. Pierre saw that there was a bridge in frontf him and that soldiers were doing something on both sides of itnd in the meadow, among the rows of new-mown hay which he had takeno notice of amid the smoke of the campfires the day before; butespite the incessant firing going on there he had no idea that thisas the field of battle. He did not notice the sound of the bulletshistling from every side, or the projectiles that flew over him,id not see the enemy on the other side of the river, and for a longime did not notice the killed and wounded, though many fell near him.e looked about him with a smile which did not leave his face.
	"Why's that fellow in front of the line?" shouted somebody at himgain.
	"To the left!... Keep to the right!" the men shouted to him.
	Pierre went to the right, and unexpectedly encountered one ofaevski's adjutants whom he knew. The adjutant looked angrily atim, evidently also intending to shout at him, but on recognizingim he nodded.
	"How have you got here?" he said, and galloped on.
	Pierre, feeling out of place there, having nothing to do, and afraidf getting in someone's way again, galloped after the adjutant.
	"What's happening here? May I come with you?" he asked.
	"One moment, one moment!" replied the adjutant, and riding up to atout colonel who was standing in the meadow, he gave him some messagend then addressed Pierre.
	"Why have you come here, Count?" he asked with a smile. "Stillnquisitive?"
	"Yes, yes," assented Pierre.
	But the adjutant turned his horse about and rode on.
	"Here it's tolerable," said he, "but with Bagration on the leftlank they're getting it frightfully hot."
	"Really?" said Pierre. "Where is that?"
	"Come along with me to our knoll. We can get a view from there andn our battery it is still bearable," said the adjutant. "Will youome?"
	"Yes, I'll come with you," replied Pierre, looking round for hisroom.
	It was only now that he noticed wounded men staggering along oreing carried on stretchers. On that very meadow he had ridden overhe day before, a soldier was lying athwart the rows of scented hay,ith his head thrown awkwardly back and his shako off.
	"Why haven't they carried him away?" Pierre was about to ask, buteeing the stern expression of the adjutant who was also lookinghat way, he checked himself.
	Pierre did not find his groom and rode along the hollow with thedjutant to Raevski's Redoubt. His horse lagged behind thedjutant's and jolted him at every step.
	"You don't seem to be used to riding, Count?" remarked the adjutant.
	"No it's not that, but her action seems so jerky," said Pierre in puzzled tone.
	"Why... she's wounded!" said the adjutant. "In the off foreleg abovehe knee. A bullet, no doubt. I congratulate you, Count, on youraptism of fire!"
	Having ridden in the smoke past the Sixth Corps, behind thertillery which had been moved forward and was in action, deafeninghem with the noise of firing, they came to a small wood. There it wasool and quiet, with a scent of autumn. Pierre and the adjutantismounted and walked up the hill on foot.
	"Is the general here?" asked the adjutant on reaching the knoll.
	"He was here a minute ago but has just gone that way," someoneold him, pointing to the right.
	The adjutant looked at Pierre as if puzzled what to do with him now.
	"Don't trouble about me," said Pierre. "I'll go up onto the knoll if may?"
	"Yes, do. You'll see everything from there and it's lessangerous, and I'll come for you."
	Pierre went to the battery and the adjutant rode on. They did noteet again, and only much later did Pierre learn that he lost an armhat day.
	The knoll to which Pierre ascended was that famous one afterwardsnown to the Russians as the Knoll Battery or Raevski's Redoubt, ando the French as la grande redoute, la fatale redoute, la redoute duentre, around which tens of thousands fell, and which the Frenchegarded as the key to the whole position.
	This redoubt consisted of a knoll, on three sides of whichrenches had been dug. Within the entrenchment stood ten guns thatere being fired through openings in the earthwork.
	In line with the knoll on both sides stood other guns which alsoired incessantly. A little behind the guns stood infantry. Whenscending that knoll Pierre had no notion that this spot, on whichmall trenches had been dug and from which a few guns were firing, washe most important point of the battle.
	On the contrary, just because he happened to be there he thoughtt one of the least significant parts of the field.
	Having reached the knoll, Pierre sat down at one end of a trenchurrounding the battery and gazed at what was going on around him withn unconsciously happy smile. Occasionally he rose and walked abouthe battery still with that same smile, trying not to obstruct theoldiers who were loading, hauling the guns, and continually runningast him with bags and charges. The guns of that battery were beingired continually one after another with a deafening roar,nveloping the whole neighborhood in powder smoke.
	In contrast with the dread felt by the infantrymen placed inupport, here in the battery where a small number of men busy at theirork were separated from the rest by a trench, everyone experienced common and as it were family feeling of animation.
	The intrusion of Pierre's nonmilitary figure in a white hat maden unpleasant impression at first. The soldiers looked askance atim with surprise and even alarm as they went past him. The seniorrtillery officer, a tall, long-legged, pockmarked man, moved overo Pierre as if to see the action of the farthest gun and looked atim with curiosity.
	A young round-faced officer, quite a boy still and evidently onlyust out of the Cadet College, who was zealously commanding the twouns entrusted to him, addressed Pierre sternly.
	"Sir," he said, "permit me to ask you to stand aside. You must note here."
	The soldiers shook their heads disapprovingly as they looked atierre. But when they had convinced themselves that this man in thehite hat was doing no harm, but either sat quietly on the slope ofhe trench with a shy smile or, politely making way for theoldiers, paced up and down the battery under fire as calmly as ife were on a boulevard, their feeling of hostile distrust graduallyegan to change into a kindly and bantering sympathy, such as soldierseel for their dogs, cocks, goats, and in general for the animals thative with the regiment. The men soon accepted Pierre into theiramily, adopted him, gave him a nickname ("our gentleman"), and madeindly fun of him among themselves.
	A shell tore up the earth two paces from Pierre and he looked aroundith a smile as he brushed from his clothes some earth it had thrownp.
	"And how's it you're not afraid, sir, really now?" a red-faced,road-shouldered soldier asked Pierre, with a grin that disclosed aet of sound, white teeth.
	"Are you afraid, then?" said Pierre.
	"What else do you expect?" answered the soldier. "She has noercy, you know! When she comes spluttering down, out go your innards.ne can't help being afraid," he said laughing.
	Several of the men, with bright kindly faces, stopped beside Pierre.hey seemed not to have expected him to talk like anybody else, andhe discovery that he did so delighted them.
	"It's the business of us soldiers. But in a gentleman it'sonderful! There's a gentleman for you!"
	"To your places!" cried the young officer to the men gatheredound Pierre.
	The young officer was evidently exercising his duties for theirst or second time and therefore treated both his superiors andhe men with great precision and formality.
	The booming cannonade and the fusillade of musketry were growingore intense over the whole field, especially to the left whereagration's fleches were, but where Pierre was the smoke of the firingade it almost impossible to distinguish anything. Moreover, his wholettention was engrossed by watching the family circle- separatedrom all else- formed by the men in the battery. His first unconsciouseeling of joyful animation produced by the sights and sounds of theattlefield was now replaced by another, especially since he hadeen that soldier lying alone in the hayfield. Now, seated on thelope of the trench, he observed the faces of those around him.
	By ten o'clock some twenty men had already been carried away fromhe battery; two guns were smashed and cannon balls fell more and morerequently on the battery and spent bullets buzzed and whistledround. But the men in the battery seemed not to notice this, anderry voices and jokes were heard on all sides.
	"A live one!" shouted a man as a whistling shell approached.
	"Not this way! To the infantry!" added another with loud laughter,eeing the shell fly past and fall into the ranks of the supports.
	"Are you bowing to a friend, eh?" remarked another, chaffing aeasant who ducked low as a cannon ball flew over.
	Several soldiers gathered by the wall of the trench, looking outo see what was happening in front.
	"They've withdrawn the front line, it has retired," said they,ointing over the earthwork.
	"Mind your own business," an old sergeant shouted at them. "Ifhey've retired it's because there's work for them to do fartherack."
	And the sergeant, taking one of the men by the shoulders, gave him ahove with his knee. This was followed by a burst of laughter.
	"To the fifth gun, wheel it up!" came shouts from one side.
	"Now then, all together, like bargees!" rose the merry voices ofhose who were moving the gun.
	"Oh, she nearly knocked our gentleman's hat off!" cried theed-faced humorist, showing his teeth chaffing Pierre. "Awkwardaggage!" he added reproachfully to a cannon ball that struck a cannonheel and a man's leg.
	"Now then, you foxes!" said another, laughing at some militiamenho, stooping low, entered the battery to carry away the wounded man.
	"So this gruel isn't to your taste? Oh, you crows! You're scared!"hey shouted at the militiamen who stood hesitating before the manhose leg had been torn off.
	"There, lads... oh, oh!" they mimicked the peasants, "they don'tike it at all!"
	Pierre noticed that after every ball that hit the redoubt, and aftervery loss, the liveliness increased more and more.
	As the flames of the fire hidden within come more and more vividlynd rapidly from an approaching thundercloud, so, as if inpposition to what was taking place, the lightning of hidden firerowing more and more intense glowed in the faces of these men.
	Pierre did not look out at the battlefield and was not concernedo know what was happening there; he was entirely absorbed in watchinghis fire which burned ever more brightly and which he felt waslaming up in the same way in his own soul.
	At ten o'clock the infantry that had been among the bushes inront of the battery and along the Kamenka streamlet retreated. Fromhe battery they could be seen running back past it carrying theirounded on their muskets. A general with his suite came to theattery, and after speaking to the colonel gave Pierre an angry looknd went away again having ordered the infantry supports behind theattery to lie down, so as to be less exposed to fire. After this frommid the ranks of infantry to the right of the battery came theound of a drum and shouts of command, and from the battery one sawow those ranks of infantry moved forward.
	Pierre looked over the wall of the trench and was particularlytruck by a pale young officer who, letting his sword hang down, wasalking backwards and kept glancing uneasily around.
	The ranks of the infantry disappeared amid the smoke but theirong-drawn shout and rapid musketry firing could still be heard. A fewinutes later crowds of wounded men and stretcher-bearers came backrom that direction. Projectiles began to fall still more frequentlyn the battery. Several men were lying about who had not been removed.round the cannon the men moved still more briskly and busily. None any longer took notice of Pierre. Once or twice he was shoutedt for being in the way. The senior officer moved with big, rapidtrides from one gun to another with a frowning face. The youngfficer, with his face still more flushed, commanded the men morecrupulously than ever. The soldiers handed up the charges, turned,oaded, and did their business with strained smartness. They gaveittle jumps as they walked, as though they were on springs.
	The stormcloud had come upon them, and in every face the firehich Pierre had watched kindle burned up brightly. Pierre standingeside the commanding officer. The young officer, his hand to hishako, ran up to his superior.
	"I have the honor to report, sir, that only eight rounds are left.re we to continue firing?" he asked.
	"Grapeshot!" the senior shouted, without answering the question,ooking over the wall of the trench.
	Suddenly something happened: the young officer gave a gasp andending double sat down on the ground like a bird shot on the wing.verything became strange, confused, and misty in Pierre's eyes.
	One cannon ball after another whistled by and struck thearthwork, a soldier, or a gun. Pierre, who had not noticed theseounds before, now heard nothing else. On the right of the batteryoldiers shouting "Hurrah!" were running not forwards but backwards,t seemed to Pierre.
	A cannon ball struck the very end of the earth work by which heas standing, crumbling down the earth; a black ball flashed beforeis eyes and at the same instant plumped into something. Someilitiamen who were entering the battery ran back.
	"All with grapeshot!" shouted the officer.
	The sergeant ran up to the officer and in a frightened whispernformed him (as a butler at dinner informs his master that there iso more of some wine asked for) that there were no more charges.
	"The scoundrels! What are they doing?" shouted the officer,urning to Pierre.
	The officer's face was red and perspiring and his eyes glitterednder his frowning brow.
	"Run to the reserves and bring up the ammunition boxes!" heelled, angrily avoiding Pierre with his eyes and speaking to his men.
	"I'll go," said Pierre.
	The officer, without answering him, strode across to the oppositeide.
	"Don't fire.... Wait!" he shouted.
	The man who had been ordered to go for ammunition stumbled againstierre.
	"Eh, sir, this is no place for you," said he, and ran down thelope.
	Pierre ran after him, avoiding the spot where the young officeras sitting.
	One cannon ball, another, and a third flew over him, falling inront, beside, and behind him. Pierre ran down the slope. "Where am going?" he suddenly asked himself when he was already near the greenmmunition wagons. He halted irresolutely, not knowing whether toeturn or go on. Suddenly a terrible concussion threw him backwards tohe ground. At the same instant he was dazzled by a great flash oflame, and immediately a deafening roar, crackling, and whistling madeis ears tingle.
	When he came to himself he was sitting on the ground leaning onis hands; the ammunition wagons he had been approaching no longerxisted, only charred green boards and rags littered the scorchedrass, and a horse, dangling fragments of its shaft behind it,alloped past, while another horse lay, like Pierre, on the ground,ttering prolonged and piercing cries.BK10|CH32
	CHAPTER XXXII
	Beside himself with terror Pierre jumped up and ran back to theattery, as to the only refuge from the horrors that surrounded him.
	On entering the earthwork he noticed that there were men doingomething there but that no shots were being fired from the battery.e had no time to realize who these men were. He saw the seniorfficer lying on the earth wall with his back turned as if he werexamining something down below and that one of the soldiers he hadoticed before was struggling forward shouting "Brothers!" andrying to free himself from some men who were holding him by therm. He also saw something else that was strange.
	But he had not time to realize that the colonel had been killed,hat the soldier shouting "Brothers!" was a prisoner, and that anotheran had been bayoneted in the back before his eyes, for hardly hade run into the redoubt before a thin, sallow-faced, perspiring man in blue uniform rushed on him sword in hand, shouting something.nstinctively guarding against the shock- for they had been runningogether at full speed before they saw one another- Pierre put out hisands and seized the man (a French officer) by the shoulder with oneand and by the throat with the other. The officer, dropping hisword, seized Pierre by his collar.
	For some seconds they gazed with frightened eyes at one another'snfamiliar faces and both were perplexed at what they had done andhat they were to do next. "Am I taken prisoner or have I taken himrisoner?" each was thinking. But the French officer was evidentlyore inclined to think he had been taken prisoner because Pierre'strong hand, impelled by instinctive fear, squeezed his throat everighter and tighter. The Frenchman was about to say something, whenust above their heads, terrible and low, a cannon ball whistled,nd it seemed to Pierre that the French officer's head had been tornff, so swiftly had he ducked it.
	Pierre too bent his head and let his hands fall. Without furtherhought as to who had taken whom prisoner, the Frenchman ran back tohe battery and Pierre ran down the slope stumbling over the deadnd wounded who, it seemed to him, caught at his feet. But before heeached the foot of the knoll he was met by a dense crowd of Russianoldiers who, stumbling, tripping up, and shouting, ran merrily andildly toward the battery. (This was the attack for which Ermolovlaimed the credit, declaring that only his courage and good luck madeuch a feat possible: it was the attack in which he was said to havehrown some St. George's Crosses he had in his pocket into the batteryor the first soldiers to take who got there.)
	The French who had occupied the battery fled, and our troopshouting "Hurrah!" pursued them so far beyond the battery that itas difficult to call them back.
	The prisoners were brought down from the battery and among themas a wounded French general, whom the officers surrounded. Crowdsf wounded- some known to Pierre and some unknown- Russians andrench, with faces distorted by suffering, walked, crawled, and werearried on stretchers from the battery. Pierre again went up ontohe knoll where he had spent over an hour, and of that family circlehich had received him as a member he did not find a single one. Thereere many dead whom he did not know, but some he recognized. The youngfficer still sat in the same way, bent double, in a pool of bloodt the edge of the earth wall. The red-faced man was stillwitching, but they did not carry him away.
	Pierre ran down the slope once more.
	"Now they will stop it, now they will be horrified at what they haveone!" he thought, aimlessly going toward a crowd of stretcher bearersoving from the battlefield.
	But behind the veil of smoke the sun was still high, and in frontnd especially to the left, near Semenovsk, something seemed to beeething in the smoke, and the roar of cannon and musketry did notiminish, but even increased to desperation like a man who,training himself, shrieks with all his remaining strength.BK10|CH33
	CHAPTER XXXIII
	The chief action of the battle of Borodino was fought within theeven thousand feet between Borodino and Bagration's fleches. Beyondhat space there was, on the one side, a demonstration made by theussians with Uvarov's cavalry at midday, and on the other side,eyond Utitsa, Poniatowski's collision with Tuchkov; but these twoere detached and feeble actions in comparison with what took place inhe center of the battlefield. On the field between Borodino and theleches, beside the wood, the chief action of the day took place on anpen space visible from both sides and was fought in the simplestnd most artless way.
	The battle began on both sides with a cannonade from several hundreduns.
	Then when the whole field was covered with smoke, two divisions,ampan's and Dessaix's, advanced from the French right, whileurat's troops advanced on Borodino from their left.
	From the Shevardino Redoubt where Napoleon was standing theleches were two thirds of a mile away, and it was more than a mile ashe crow flies to Borodino, so that Napoleon could not see what wasappening there, especially as the smoke mingling with the mist hidhe whole locality. The soldiers of Dessaix's division advancinggainst the fleches could only be seen till they had entered theollow that lay between them and the fleches. As soon as they hadescended into that hollow, the smoke of the guns and musketry onhe fleches grew so dense that it covered the whole approach on thatide of it. Through the smoke glimpses could be caught of somethinglack- probably men- and at times the glint of bayonets. But whetherhey were moving or stationary, whether they were French or Russian,ould not be discovered from the Shevardino Redoubt.
	The sun had risen brightly and its slanting rays struck straightnto Napoleon's face as, shading his eyes with his hand, he lookedt the fleches. The smoke spread out before them, and at times itooked as if the smoke were moving, at times as if the troops moved.ometimes shouts were heard through the firing, but it wasmpossible to tell what was being done there.
	Napoleon, standing on the knoll, looked through a field glass, andn its small circlet saw smoke and men, sometimes his own andometimes Russians, but when he looked again with the naked eye, heould not tell where what he had seen was.
	He descended the knoll and began walking up and down before it.
	Occasionally he stopped, listened to the firing, and gazedntently at the battlefield.
	But not only was it impossible to make out what was happening fromhere he was standing down below, or from the knoll above on whichome of his generals had taken their stand, but even from theleches themselves- in which by this time there were now Russian andow French soldiers, alternately or together, dead, wounded, alive,rightened, or maddened- even at those fleches themselves it wasmpossible to make out what was taking place. There for severalours amid incessant cannon and musketry fire, now Russians wereeen alone, now Frenchmen alone, now infantry, and now cavalry: theyppeared, fired, fell, collided, not knowing what to do with onenother, screamed, and ran back again.
	From the battlefield adjutants he had sent out, and orderlies fromis marshals, kept galloping up to Napoleon with reports of therogress of the action, but all these reports were false, both becauset was impossible in the heat of battle to say what was happening atny given moment and because many of the adjutants did not go to thectual place of conflict but reported what they had heard from others;nd also because while an adjutant was riding more than a mile toapoleon circumstances changed and the news he brought was alreadyecoming false. Thus an adjutant galloped up from Murat with tidingshat Borodino had been occupied and the bridge over the Kolocha was inhe hands of the French. The adjutant asked whether Napoleon wishedhe troops to cross it? Napoleon gave orders that the troops shouldorm up on the farther side and wait. But before that order was given-lmost as soon in fact as the adjutant had left Borodino- the bridgead been retaken by the Russians and burned, in the very skirmish athich Pierre had been present at the beginning of the battle.
	An adjutant galloped up from the fleches with a pale andrightened face and reported to Napoleon that their attack had beenepulsed, Campan wounded, and Davout killed; yet at the very timehe adjutant had been told that the French had been repulsed, theleches had in fact been recaptured by other French troops, and Davoutas alive and only slightly bruised. On the basis of these necessarilyntrustworthy reports Napoleon gave his orders, which had eithereen executed before he gave them or could not be and were notxecuted.
	The marshals and generals, who were nearer to the field of battleut, like Napoleon, did not take part in the actual fighting andnly occasionally went within musket range, made their ownrrangements without asking Napoleon and issued orders where and inhat direction to fire and where cavalry should gallop and infantryhould run. But even their orders, like Napoleon's, were seldomarried out, and then but partially. For the most part things happenedontrary to their orders. Soldiers ordered to advance ran back oneeting grapeshot; soldiers ordered to remain where they were,uddenly, seeing Russians unexpectedly before them, sometimes rushedack and sometimes forward, and the cavalry dashed without orders inursuit of the flying Russians. In this way two cavalry regimentsalloped through the Semenovsk hollow and as soon as they reachedhe top of the incline turned round and galloped full speed backgain. The infantry moved in the same way, sometimes running touite other places than those they were ordered to go to. All orderss to where and when to move the guns, when to send infantry tohoot or horsemen to ride down the Russian infantry- all such ordersere given by the officers on the spot nearest to the units concerned,ithout asking either Ney, Davout, or Murat, much less Napoleon.hey did not fear getting into trouble for not fulfilling orders oror acting on their own initiative, for in battle what is at stakes what is dearest to man- his own life- and it sometimes seems thatafety lies in running back, sometimes in running forward; and theseen who were right in the heat of the battle acted according to theood of the moment. In reality, however, all these movements forwardnd backward did not improve or alter the position of the troops.ll their rushing and galloping at one another did little harm, thearm of disablement and death was caused by the balls and bullets thatlew over the fields on which these men were floundering about. Asoon as they left the place where the balls and bullets were flyingbout, their superiors, located in the background, re-formed themnd brought them under discipline and under the influence of thatiscipline led them back to the zone of fire, where under thenfluence of fear of death they lost their discipline and rushed aboutccording to the chance promptings of the throng.BK10|CH34
	CHAPTER XXXIV
	Napoleon's generals- Davout, Ney, and Murat, who were near thategion of fire and sometimes even entered it- repeatedly led into ituge masses of well-ordered troops. But contrary to what had alwaysappened in their former battles, instead of the news they expected ofhe enemy's flight, these orderly masses returned thence asisorganized and terrified mobs. The generals re-formed them, butheir numbers constantly decreased. In the middle of the day Muratent his adjutant to Napoleon to demand reinforcements.
	Napoleon sat at the foot of the knoll, drinking punch, whenurat's adjutant galloped up with an assurance that the Russians woulde routed if His Majesty would let him have another division.
	"Reinforcements?" said Napoleon in a tone of stern surprise, lookingt the adjutant- a handsome lad with long black curls arranged likeurat's own- as though he did not understand his words.
	"Reinforcements!" thought Napoleon to himself. "How can they needeinforcements when they already have half the army directed against aeak, unentrenched Russian wing?"
	"Tell the King of Naples," said he sternly, "that it is not noonet, and I don't yet see my chessboard clearly. Go!..."
	The handsome boy adjutant with the long hair sighed deeply withoutemoving his hand from his hat and galloped back to where men wereeing slaughtered.
	Napoleon rose and having summoned Caulaincourt and Berthier beganalking to them about matters unconnected with the battle.
	In the midst of this conversation, which was beginning to interestapoleon, Berthier's eyes turned to look at a general with a suite,ho was galloping toward the knoll on a lathering horse. It waselliard. Having dismounted he went up to the Emperor with rapidtrides and in a loud voice began boldly demonstrating the necessityf sending reinforcements. He swore on his honor that the Russiansere lost if the Emperor would give another division.
	Napoleon shrugged his shoulders and continued to pace up and downithout replying. Belliard began talking loudly and eagerly to theenerals of the suite around him.
	"You are very fiery, Belliard," said Napoleon, when he again came upo the general. "In the heat of a battle it is easy to make a mistake.o and have another look and then come back to me."
	Before Belliard was out of sight, a messenger from another part ofhe battlefield galloped up.
	"Now then, what do you want?" asked Napoleon in the tone of a manrritated at being continually disturbed.
	"Sire, the prince..." began the adjutant.
	"Asks for reinforcements?" said Napoleon with an angry gesture.
	The adjutant bent his head affirmatively and began to report, buthe Emperor turned from him, took a couple of steps, stopped, cameack, and called Berthier.
	"We must give reserves," he said, moving his arms slightly apart.Who do you think should be sent there?" he asked of Berthier (whom heubsequently termed "that gosling I have made an eagle").
	"Send Claparede's division, sire," replied Berthier, who knew allhe divisions regiments, and battalions by heart.
	Napoleon nodded assent.
	The adjutant galloped to Claparede's division and a few minutesater the Young Guards stationed behind the knoll moved forward.apoleon gazed silently in that direction.
	"No!" he suddenly said to Berthier. "I can't send Claparede. Sendriant's division."
	Though there was no advantage in sending Friant's division insteadf Claparede's, and even in obvious inconvenience and delay intopping Claparede and sending Friant now, the order was carried outxactly. Napoleon did not notice that in regard to his army he waslaying the part of a doctor who hinders by his medicines- a role heo justly understood and condemned.
	Friant's division disappeared as the others had done into themoke of the battlefield. From all sides adjutants continued to arrivet a gallop and as if by agreement all said the same thing. They allsked for reinforcements and all said that the Russians were holdingheir positions and maintaining a hellish fire under which therench army was melting away.
	Napoleon sat on a campstool, wrapped in thought.
	M. de Beausset, the man so fond of travel, having fasted sinceorning, came up to the Emperor and ventured respectfully to suggestunch to His Majesty.
	"I hope I may now congratulate Your Majesty on a victory?" said he.
	Napoleon silently shook his head in negation. Assuming theegation to refer only to the victory and not to the lunch, M. deeausset ventured with respectful jocularity to remark that there iso reason for not having lunch when one can get it.
	"Go away..." exclaimed Napoleon suddenly and morosely, and turnedside.
	A beatific smile of regret, repentance, and ecstasy beamed on M.e Beausset's face and he glided away to the other generals.
	Napoleon was experiencing a feeling of depression like that of anver-lucky gambler who, after recklessly flinging money about andlways winning, suddenly just when he has calculated all the chancesf the game, finds that the more he considers his play the more surelye loses.
	His troops were the same, his generals the same, the samereparations had been made, the same dispositions, and the sameroclamation courte et energique, he himself was still the same: henew that and knew that he was now even more experienced andkillful than before. Even the enemy was the same as at Austerlitz andriedland- yet the terrible stroke of his arm had supernaturallyecome impotent.
	All the old methods that had been unfailingly crowned withuccess: the concentration of batteries on one point, an attack byeserves to break the enemy's line, and a cavalry attack by "the menf iron," all these methods had already been employed, yet not onlyas there no victory, but from all sides came the same news ofenerals killed and wounded, of reinforcements needed, of thempossibility of driving back the Russians, and of disorganizationmong his own troops.
	Formerly, after he had given two or three orders and uttered a fewhrases, marshals and adjutants had come galloping up withongratulations and happy faces, announcing the trophies taken, theorps of prisoners, bundles of enemy eagles and standards, cannonnd stores, and Murat had only begged leave to loose the cavalry toather in the baggage wagons. So it had been at Lodi, Marengo, Arcola,ena, Austerlitz, Wagram, and so on. But now something strange wasappening to his troops.
	Despite news of the capture of the fleches, Napoleon saw that thisas not the same, not at all the same, as what had happened in hisormer battles. He saw that what he was feeling was felt by all theen about him experienced in the art of war. All their faces lookedejected, and they all shunned one another's eyes- only a deeausset could fail to grasp the meaning of what was happening.
	But Napoleon with his long experience of war well knew the meaningf a battle not gained by the attacking side in eight hours, after allfforts had been expended. He knew that it was a lost battle andhat the least accident might now- with the fight balanced on such atrained center- destroy him and his army.
	When he ran his mind over the whole of this strange Russian campaignn which not one battle had been won, and in which not a flag, orannon, or army corps had been captured in two months, when heooked at the concealed depression on the faces around him and heardeports of the Russians still holding their ground- a terrible feelingike a nightmare took possession of him, and all the unlucky accidentshat might destroy him occurred to his mind. The Russians might falln his left wing, might break through his center, he himself mighte killed by a stray cannon ball. All this was possible. In formerattles he had only considered the possibilities of success, but nownnumerable unlucky chances presented themselves, and he expected themll. Yes, it was like a dream in which a man fancies that a ruffian isoming to attack him, and raises his arm to strike that ruffian aerrible blow which he knows should annihilate him, but then feelshat his arm drops powerless and limp like a rag, and the horror ofnavoidable destruction seizes him in his helplessness.
	The news that the Russians were attacking the left flank of therench army aroused that horror in Napoleon. He sat silently on aampstool below the knoll, with head bowed and elbows on his knees.erthier approached and suggested that they should ride along the lineo ascertain the position of affairs.
	"What? What do you say?" asked Napoleon. "Yes, tell them to bring mey horse."
	He mounted and rode toward Semenovsk.
	Amid the powder smoke, slowly dispersing over the whole spacehrough which Napoleon rode, horses and men were lying in pools oflood, singly or in heaps. Neither Napoleon nor any of his generalsad ever before seen such horrors or so many slain in such a smallrea. The roar of guns, that had not ceased for ten hours, wearied thear and gave a peculiar significance to the spectacle, as music doeso tableaux vivants. Napoleon rode up the high ground at Semenovsk,nd through the smoke saw ranks of men in uniforms of a colornfamiliar to him. They were Russians.
	The Russians stood in serried ranks behind Semenovsk village and itsnoll, and their guns boomed incessantly along their line and sentorth clouds of smoke. It was no longer a battle: it was aontinuous slaughter which could be of no avail either to the Frenchr the Russians. Napoleon stopped his horse and again fell into theeverie from which Berthier had aroused him. He could not stop whatas going on before him and around him and was supposed to be directedy him and to depend on him, and from its lack of success this affair,or the first time, seemed to him unnecessary and horrible.
	One of the generals rode up to Napoleon and ventured to offer toead the Old Guard into action. Ney and Berthier, standing nearapoleon, exchanged looks and smiled contemptuously at thiseneral's senseless offer.
	Napoleon bowed his head and remained silent a long time.
	"At eight hundred leagues from France, I will not have my Guardestroyed!" he said, and turning his horse rode back to Shevardino.BK10|CH35
	CHAPTER XXXV
	On the rug-covered bench where Pierre had seen him in the morningat Kutuzov, his gray head hanging, his heavy body relaxed. He gave norders, but only assented to or dissented from what others suggested.
	"Yes, yes, do that," he replied to various proposals. "Yes, yes: go,ear boy, and have a look," he would say to one or another of thosebout him; or, "No, don't, we'd better wait!" He listened to theeports that were brought him and gave directions when hisubordinates demanded that of him; but when listening to the reportst seemed as if he were not interested in the import of the wordspoken, but rather in something else- in the expression of face andone of voice of those who were reporting. By long years of militaryxperience he knew, and with the wisdom of age understood, that its impossible for one man to direct hundreds of thousands of otherstruggling with death, and he knew that the result of a battle isecided not by the orders of a commander in chief, nor the place wherehe troops are stationed, nor by the number of cannon or oflaughtered men, but by that intangible force called the spirit of thermy, and he watched this force and guided it in as far as that was inis power.
	Kutuzov's general expression was one of concentrated quietttention, and his face wore a strained look as if he found itifficult to master the fatigue of his old and feeble body.
	At eleven o'clock they brought him news that the fleches captured byhe French had been retaken, but that Prince Bagration was wounded.utuzov groaned and swayed his head.
	"Ride over to Prince Peter Ivanovich and find out about it exactly,"e said to one of his adjutants, and then turned to the Duke ofurttemberg who was standing behind him.
	"Will Your Highness please take command of the first army?"
	Soon after the duke's departure- before he could possibly haveeached Semenovsk- his adjutant came back from him and told Kutuzovhat the duke asked for more troops.
	Kutuzov made a grimace and sent an order to Dokhturov to take overhe command of the first army, and a request to the duke- whom he saide could not spare at such an important moment- to return to him. Whenhey brought him news that Murat had been taken prisoner, and thetaff officers congratulated him, Kutuzov smiled.
	"Wait a little, gentlemen," said he. "The battle is won, and theres nothing extraordinary in the capture of Murat. Still, it isetter to wait before we rejoice."
	But he sent an adjutant to take the news round the army.
	When Scherbinin came galloping from the left flank with news thathe French had captured the fleches and the village of Semenovsk,utuzov, guessing by the sounds of the battle and by Scherbinin'sooks that the news was bad, rose as if to stretch his legs and,aking Scherbinin's arm, led him aside.
	"Go, my dear fellow," he said to Ermolov, "and see whether somethingan't be done."
	Kutuzov was in Gorki, near the center of the Russian position. Thettack directed by Napoleon against our left flank had been severalimes repulsed. In the center the French had not got beyondorodino, and on their left flank Uvarov's cavalry had put therench to flight.
	Toward three o'clock the French attacks ceased. On the faces ofll who came from the field of battle, and of those who stood aroundim, Kutuzov noticed an expression of extreme tension. He wasatisfied with the day's success- a success exceeding hisxpectations, but the old man's strength was failing him. Severalimes his head dropped low as if it were falling and he dozed off.inner was brought him.
	Adjutant General Wolzogen, the man who when riding past Princendrew had said, "the war should be extended widely," and whomagration so detested, rode up while Kutuzov was at dinner. Wolzogenad come from Barclay de Tolly to report on the progress of affairs onhe left flank. The sagacious Barclay de Tolly, seeing crowds ofounded men running back and the disordered rear of the army,eighed all the circumstances, concluded that the battle was lost, andent his favorite officer to the commander in chief with that news.
	Kutuzov was chewing a piece of roast chicken with difficulty andlanced at Wolzogen with eyes that brightened under their puckeringids.
	Wolzogen, nonchalantly stretching his legs, approached Kutuzovith a half-contemptuous smile on his lips, scarcely touching the peakf his cap.
	He treated his Serene Highness with a somewhat affectedonchalance intended to show that, as a highly trained military man,e left it to Russians to make an idol of this useless old man, buthat he knew whom he was dealing with. "Der alte Herr" (as in theirwn set the Germans called Kutuzov) "is making himself veryomfortable," thought Wolzogen, and looking severely at the dishesn front of Kutuzov he began to report to "the old gentleman" theosition of affairs on the left flank as Barclay had ordered him tond as he himself had seen and understood it.
	"All the points of our position are in the enemy's hands and weannot dislodge them for lack of troops, the men are running awaynd it is impossible to stop them," he reported.
	Kutuzov ceased chewing and fixed an astonished gaze on Wolzogen,s if not understand what was said to him. Wolzogen, noticing "the oldentleman's" agitation, said with a smile:
	"I have not considered it right to conceal from your Serene Highnesshat I have seen. The troops are in complete disorder..."
	"You have seen? You have seen?..." Kutuzov shouted frowning, andising quickly he went up to Wolzogen.
	"How... how dare you!..." he shouted, choking and making ahreatening gesture with his trembling arms: "How dare you, sir, sayhat to me? You know nothing about it. Tell General Barclay from mehat his information is incorrect and that the real course of theattle is better known to me, the commander in chief, than to him."
	Wolzogen was about to make a rejoinder, but Kutuzov interrupted him.
	"The enemy has been repulsed on the left and defeated on the rightlank. If you have seen amiss, sir, do not allow yourself to sayhat you don't know! Be so good as to ride to General Barclay andnform him of my firm intention to attack the enemy tomorrow," saidutuzov sternly.
	All were silent, and the only sound audible was the heavyreathing of the panting old general.
	"They are repulsed everywhere, for which I thank God and our bravermy! The enemy is beaten, and tomorrow we shall drive him from theacred soil of Russia," said Kutuzov crossing himself, and he suddenlyobbed as his eyes filled with tears.
	Wolzogen, shrugging his shoulders and curling his lips, steppedilently aside, marveling at "the old gentleman's" conceitedtupidity.
	"Ah, here he is, my hero!" said Kutuzov to a portly, handsome,ark-haired general who was just ascending the knoll.
	This was Raevski, who had spent the whole day at the mostmportant part of the field of Borodino.
	Raevski reported that the troops were firmly holding their groundnd that the French no longer ventured to attack.
	After hearing him, Kutuzov said in French:
	"Then you do not think, like some others, that we must retreat?"
	"On the contrary, your Highness, in indecisive actions it islways the most stubborn who remain victors," replied Raevski, "and iny opinion..."
	"Kaysarov!" Kutuzov called to his adjutant. "Sit down and writeut the order of the day for tomorrow. And you," he continued,ddressing another, "ride along the line and that tomorrow we attack."
	While Kutuzov was talking to Raevski and dictating the order ofhe day, Wolzogen returned from Barclay and said that Generalarclay wished to have written confirmation of the order the fieldarshal had given.
	Kutuzov, without looking at Wolzogen, gave directions for therder to be written out which the former commander in chief, tovoid personal responsibility, very judiciously wished to receive.
	And by means of that mysterious indefinable bond which maintainshroughout an army one and the same temper, known as "the spirit ofhe army," and which constitutes the sinew of war, Kutuzov's words,is order for a battle next day, immediately became known from one endf the army to the other.
	It was far from being the same words or the same order thateached the farthest links of that chain. The tales passing from moutho mouth at different ends of the army did not even resemble whatutuzov had said, but the sense of his words spread everywhere becausehat he said was not the outcome of cunning calculations, but of aeeling that lay in the commander in chief's soul as in that ofvery Russian.
	And on learning that tomorrow they were to attack the enemy, andearing from the highest quarters a confirmation of what they wantedo believe, the exhausted, wavering men felt comforted and inspirited.BK10|CH36
	CHAPTER XXXVI
	Prince Andrew's regiment was among the reserves which till after one'clock were stationed inactive behind Semenovsk, under heavyrtillery fire. Toward two o'clock the regiment, having already lostore than two hundred men, was moved forward into a trampledatfield in the gap between Semenovsk and the Knoll Battery, wherehousands of men perished that day and on which an intense,oncentrated fire from several hundred enemy guns was directed betweenne and two o'clock.
	Without moving from that spot or firing a single shot the regimentere lost another third of its men. From in front and especiallyrom the right, in the unlifting smoke the guns boomed, and out of theysterious domain of smoke that overlay the whole space in front,uick hissing cannon balls and slow whistling shells flew unceasingly.t times, as if to allow them a respite, a quarter of an hour passeduring which the cannon balls and shells all flew overhead, butometimes several men were torn from the regiment in a minute andhe slain were continually being dragged away and the woundedarried off.
	With each fresh blow less and less chance of life remained for thoseot yet killed. The regiment stood in columns of battalion, threeundred paces apart, but nevertheless the men were always in one andhe same mood. All alike were taciturn and morose. Talk was rarelyeard in the ranks, and it ceased altogether every time the thud of successful shot and the cry of "stretchers!" was heard. Most ofhe time, by their officers' order, the men sat on the ground. One,aving taken off his shako, carefully loosened the gathers of itsining and drew them tight again; another, rubbing some dry clayetween his palms, polished his bayonet; another fingered the strapnd pulled the buckle of his bandolier, while another smoothed andefolded his leg bands and put his boots on again. Some built littleouses of the tufts in the plowed ground, or plaited baskets fromhe straw in the cornfield. All seemed fully absorbed in theseursuits. When men were killed or wounded, when rows of stretchersent past, when some troops retreated, and when great masses of thenemy came into view through the smoke, no one paid any attention tohese things. But when our artillery or cavalry advanced or some ofur infantry were seen to move forward, words of approval were heardn all sides. But the liveliest attention was attracted by occurrencesuite apart from, and unconnected with, the battle. It was as if theinds of these morally exhausted men found relief in everyday,ommonplace occurrences. A battery of artillery was passing in frontf the regiment. The horse of an ammunition cart put its leg over arace. "Hey, look at the trace horse!... Get her leg out! She'llall.... Ah, they don't see it!" came identical shouts from theanks all along the regiment. Another time, general attention wasttracted by a small brown dog, coming heaven knows whence, whichrotted in a preoccupied manner in front of the ranks with tailtiffly erect till suddenly a shell fell close by, when it yelped,ucked its tail between its legs, and darted aside. Yells andhrieks of laughter rose from the whole regiment. But suchistractions lasted only a moment, and for eight hours the men hadeen inactive, without food, in constant fear of death, and their palend gloomy faces grew ever paler and gloomier.
	Prince Andrew, pale and gloomy like everyone in the regiment,aced up and down from the border of one patch to another, at the edgef the meadow beside an oatfield, with head bowed and arms behindis back. There was nothing for him to do and no orders to be given.verything went on of itself. The killed were dragged from theront, the wounded carried away, and the ranks closed up. If anyoldiers ran to the rear they returned immediately and hastily. Atirst Prince Andrew, considering it his duty to rouse the courage ofhe men and to set them an example, walked about among the ranks,ut he soon became convinced that this was unnecessary and thathere was nothing he could teach them. All the powers of his soul,s of every soldier there, were unconsciously bent on avoiding theontemplation of the horrors of their situation. He walked along theeadow, dragging his feet, rustling the grass, and gazing at theust that covered his boots; now he took big strides trying to keep tohe footprints left on the meadow by the mowers, then he counted histeps, calculating how often he must walk from one strip to another toalk a mile, then he stripped the flowers from the wormwood thatrew along a boundary rut, rubbed them in his palms, and smelled theirungent, sweetly bitter scent. Nothing remained of the previousay's thoughts. He thought of nothing. He listened with weary earso the ever-recurring sounds, distinguishing the whistle of flyingrojectiles from the booming of the reports, glanced at the tiresomelyamiliar faces of the men of the first battalion, and waited. "Here itomes... this one is coming our way again!" he thought, listening ton approaching whistle in the hidden region of smoke. "One, another!gain! It has hit...." He stopped and looked at the ranks. "No, it hasone over. But this one has hit!" And again he started trying to reachhe boundary strip in sixteen paces. A whizz and a thud! Five pacesrom him, a cannon ball tore up the dry earth and disappeared. A chillan down his back. Again he glanced at the ranks. Probably many hadeen hit- a large crowd had gathered near the second battalion.
	"Adjutant!" he shouted. "Order them not to crowd together."
	The adjutant, having obeyed this instruction, approached Princendrew. From the other side a battalion commander rode up.
	"Look out!" came a frightened cry from a soldier and, like a birdhirring in rapid flight and alighting on the ground, a shellropped with little noise within two steps of Prince Andrew andlose to the battalion commander's horse. The horse first,egardless of whether it was right or wrong to show fear, snorted,eared almost throwing the major, and galloped aside. The horse'serror infected the men.
	"Lie down!" cried the adjutant, throwing himself flat on the ground.
	Prince Andrew hesitated. The smoking shell spun like a top betweenim and the prostrate adjutant, near a wormwood plant between theield and the meadow.
	"Can this be death?" thought Prince Andrew, looking with a quiteew, envious glance at the grass, the wormwood, and the streamlet ofmoke that curled up from the rotating black ball. "I cannot, I do notish to die. I love life- I love this grass, this earth, this air...."e thought this, and at the same time remembered that people wereooking at him.
	"It's shameful, sir!" he said to the adjutant. "What..."
	He did not finish speaking. At one and the same moment came theound of an explosion, a whistle of splinters as from a breakingindow frame, a suffocating smell of powder, and Prince Andrew startedo one side, raising his arm, and fell on his chest. Severalfficers ran up to him. From the right side of his abdomen, bloodas welling out making a large stain on the grass.
	The militiamen with stretchers who were called up stood behind thefficers. Prince Andrew lay on his chest with his face in the grass,reathing heavily and noisily.
	"What are you waiting for? Come along!"
	The peasants went up and took him by his shoulders and legs, bute moaned piteously and, exchanging looks, they set him down again.
	"Pick him up, lift him, it's all the same!" cried someone.
	They again took him by the shoulders and laid him on the stretcher.
	"Ah, God! My God! What is it? The stomach? That means death! Myod!"- voices among the officers were heard saying.
	"It flew a hair's breadth past my ear," said the adjutant.
	The peasants, adjusting the stretcher to their shoulders, startedurriedly along the path they had trodden down, to the dressingtation.
	"Keep in step! Ah... those peasants!" shouted an officer, seizing byheir shoulders and checking the peasants, who were walking unevenlynd jolting the stretcher.
	"Get into step, Fedor... I say, Fedor!" said the foremost peasant.
	"Now that's right!" said the one behind joyfully, when he had gotnto step.
	"Your excellency! Eh, Prince!" said the trembling voice of Timokhin,ho had run up and was looking down on the stretcher.
	Prince Andrew opened his eyes and looked up at the speaker fromhe stretcher into which his head had sunk deep and again hisyelids drooped.
	The militiamen carried Prince Andrew to dressing station by theood, where wagons were stationed. The dressing station consisted ofhree tents with flaps turned back, pitched at the edge of a birchood. In the wood, wagons and horses were standing. The horses wereating oats from their movable troughs and sparrows flew down andecked the grains that fell. Some crows, scenting blood, flew amonghe birch trees cawing impatiently. Around the tents, over more thanive acres, bloodstained men in various garbs stood, sat, or lay.round the wounded stood crowds of soldier stretcher-bearers withismal and attentive faces, whom the officers keeping order tried inain to drive from the spot. Disregarding the officers' orders, theoldiers stood leaning against their stretchers and gazing intently,s if trying to comprehend the difficult problem of what was takinglace before them. From the tents came now loud angry cries and nowlaintive groans. Occasionally dressers ran out to fetch water, oro point out those who were to be brought in next. The wounded menwaiting their turn outside the tents groaned, sighed, wept, screamed,wore, or asked for vodka. Some were delirious. Prince Andrew'searers, stepping over the wounded who had not yet been bandaged, tookim, as a regimental commander, close up to one of the tents and theretopped, awaiting instructions. Prince Andrew opened his eyes andor a long time could not make out what was going on around him. Heemembered the meadow, the wormwood, the field, the whirling blackall, and his sudden rush of passionate love of life. Two steps fromim, leaning against a branch and talking loudly and attractingeneral attention, stood a tall, handsome, black-hairedoncommissioned officer with a bandaged head. He had been wounded inhe head and leg by bullets. Around him, eagerly listening to hisalk, a crowd of wounded and stretcher-bearers was gathered.
	"We kicked him out from there so that he chucked everything, werabbed the King himself!" cried he, looking around him with eyes thatlittered with fever. "If only reserves had come up just then, lads,here wouldn't have been nothing left of him! I tell you surely..."
	Like all the others near the speaker, Prince Andrew looked at himith shining eyes and experienced a sense of comfort. "But isn't itll the same now?" thought he. "And what will be there, and what hashere been here? Why was I so reluctant to part with life? There wasomething in this life I did not and do not understand."BK10|CH37
	CHAPTER XXXVII
	One of the doctors came out of the tent in a bloodstained apron,olding a cigar between the thumb and little finger of one of hismall bloodstained hands, so as not to smear it. He raised his headnd looked about him, but above the level of the wounded men. Hevidently wanted a little respite. After turning his head from righto left for some time, he sighed and looked down.
	"All right, immediately," he replied to a dresser who pointed Princendrew out to him, and he told them to carry him into the tent.
	Murmurs arose among the wounded who were waiting.
	"It seems that even in the next world only the gentry are to have chance!" remarked one.
	Prince Andrew was carried in and laid on a table that had onlyust been cleared and which a dresser was washing down. Princendrew could not make out distinctly what was in that tent. Theitiful groans from all sides and the torturing pain in his thigh,tomach, and back distracted him. All he saw about him merged into aeneral impression of naked, bleeding human bodies that seemed to fillhe whole of the low tent, as a few weeks previously, on that hotugust day, such bodies had filled the dirty pond beside themolensk road. Yes, it was the same flesh, the same chair a canon, theight of which had even then filled him with horror, as by aresentiment.
	There were three operating tables in the tent. Two were occupied,nd on the third they placed Prince Andrew. For a little while heas left alone and involuntarily witnessed what was taking place onhe other two tables. On the nearest one sat a Tartar, probably aossack, judging by the uniform thrown down beside him. Fouroldiers were holding him, and a spectacled doctor was cutting intois muscular brown back.
	"Ooh, ooh, ooh!" grunted the Tartar, and suddenly lifting up hiswarthy snub-nosed face with its high cheekbones, and baring his whiteeeth, he began to wriggle and twitch his body and utter piercing,inging, and prolonged yells. On the other table, round which manyeople were crowding, a tall well-fed man lay on his back with hisead thrown back. His curly hair, its color, and the shape of his headeemed strangely familiar to Prince Andrew. Several dressers wereressing on his chest to hold him down. One large, white, plump legwitched rapidly all the time with a feverish tremor. The man wasobbing and choking convulsively. Two doctors- one of whom was palend trembling- were silently doing something to this man's other, goryeg. When he had finished with the Tartar, whom they covered with anvercoat, the spectacled doctor came up to Prince Andrew, wiping hisands.
	He glanced at Prince Andrew's face and quickly turned away.
	"Undress him! What are you waiting for?" he cried angrily to theressers.
	His very first, remotest recollections of childhood came back torince Andrew's mind when the dresser with sleeves rolled up beganastily to undo the buttons of his clothes and undressed him. Theoctor bent down over the wound, felt it, and sighed deeply. Then heade a sign to someone, and the torturing pain in his abdomen causedrince Andrew to lose consciousness. When he came to himself theplintered portions of his thighbone had been extracted, the tornlesh cut away, and the wound bandaged. Water was being sprinkled onis face. As soon as Prince Andrew opened his eyes, the doctor bentver, kissed him silently on the lips, and hurried away.
	After the sufferings he had been enduring, Prince Andrew enjoyed alissful feeling such as he had not experienced for a long time. Allhe best and happiest moments of his life- especially his earliesthildhood, when he used to be undressed and put to bed, and wheneaning over him his nurse sang him to sleep and he, burying hisead in the pillow, felt happy in the mere consciousness of life-eturned to his memory, not merely as something past but asomething present.
	The doctors were busily engaged with the wounded man the shape ofhose head seemed familiar to Prince Andrew: they were lifting himp and trying to quiet him.
	"Show it to me.... Oh, ooh... Oh! Oh, ooh!" his frightened moansould be heard, subdued by suffering and broken by sobs.
	Hearing those moans Prince Andrew wanted Andrew wanted to weep.hether because he was dying without glory, or because he was sorry toart with life, or because of those memories of a childhood that couldot return, or because he was suffering and others were sufferingnd that man near him was groaning so piteously- he felt likeeeping childlike, kindly, and almost happy tears.
	The wounded man was shown his amputated leg stained with clottedlood and with the boot still on.
	"Oh! Oh, ooh!" he sobbed, like a woman.
	The doctor who had been standing beside him, preventing Princendrew from seeing his face, moved away.
	"My God! What is this? Why is he here?" said Prince Andrew toimself.
	In the miserable, sobbing, enfeebled man whose leg had just beenmputated, he recognized Anatole Kuragin. Men were supporting him inheir arms and offering him a glass of water, but his trembling,wollen lips could not grasp its rim. Anatole was sobbing painfully.Yes, it is he! Yes, that man is somehow closely and painfullyonnected with me," thought Prince Andrew, not yet clearly graspinghat he saw before him. "What is the connection of that man with myhildhood and life?" he asked himself without finding an answer. Anduddenly a new unexpected memory from that realm of pure and lovinghildhood presented itself to him. He remembered Natasha as he hadeen her for the first time at the ball in 1810, with her slender necknd arms and with a frightened happy face ready for rapture, andove and tenderness for her, stronger and more vivid than ever,woke in his soul. He now remembered the connection that existedetween himself and this man who was dimly gazing at him through tearshat filled his swollen eyes. He remembered everything, and ecstaticity and love for that man overflowed his happy heart.
	Prince Andrew could no longer restrain himself and wept tenderoving tears for his fellow men, for himself, and for his own andheir errors.
	"Compassion, love of our brothers, for those who love us and forhose who hate us, love of our enemies; yes, that love which Godreached on earth and which Princess Mary taught me and I did notnderstand- that is what made me sorry to part with life, that is whatemained for me had I lived. But now it is too late. I know it!"BK10|CH38
	CHAPTER XXXVIII
	The terrible spectacle of the battlefield covered with dead andounded, together with the heaviness of his head and the news thatome twenty generals he knew personally had been killed or wounded,nd the consciousness of the impotence of his once mighty arm,roduced an unexpected impression on Napoleon who usually liked toook at the killed and wounded, thereby, he considered, testing histrength of mind. This day the horrible appearance of theattlefield overcame that strength of mind which he thoughtonstituted his merit and his greatness. He rode hurriedly from theattlefield and returned to the Shevardino knoll, where he sat onis campstool, his sallow face swollen and heavy, his eyes dim, hisose red, and his voice hoarse, involuntarily listening, with downcastyes, to the sounds of firing. With painful dejection he awaited thend of this action, in which he regarded himself as a participantnd which he was unable to arrest. A personal, human feeling for arief moment got the better of the artificial phantasm of life head served so long. He felt in his own person the sufferings and deathe had witnessed on the battlefield. The heaviness of his head andhest reminded him of the possibility of suffering and death forimself. At that moment he did not desire Moscow, or victory, or glorywhat need had he for any more glory?). The one thing he wished foras rest, tranquillity, and freedom. But when he had been on theemenovsk heights the artillery commander had proposed to him to bringeveral batteries of artillery up to those heights to strengthen theire on the Russian troops crowded in front of Knyazkovo. Napoleon hadssented and had given orders that news should be brought to him ofhe effect those batteries produced.
	An adjutant came now to inform him that the fire of two hundred gunsad been concentrated on the Russians, as he had ordered, but thathey still held their ground.
	"Our fire is mowing them down by rows, but still they hold on," saidhe adjutant.
	"They want more!..." said Napoleon in a hoarse voice.
	"Sire?" asked the adjutant who had not heard the remark.
	"They want more!" croaked Napoleon frowning. "Let them have it!"
	Even before he gave that order the thing he did not desire, andor which he gave the order only because he thought it was expected ofim, was being done. And he fell back into that artificial realm ofmaginary greatness, and again- as a horse walking a treadmillhinks it is doing something for itself- he submissively fulfilled theruel, sad, gloomy, and inhuman role predestined for him.
	And not for that day and hour alone were the mind and consciencearkened of this man on whom the responsibility for what was happeningay more than on all the others who took part in it. Never to thend of his life could he understand goodness, beauty, or truth, or theignificance of his actions which were too contrary to goodness andruth, too remote from everything human, for him ever to be able torasp their meaning. He could not disavow his actions, belauded ashey were by half the world, and so he had to repudiate truth,oodness, and all humanity.
	Not only on that day, as he rode over the battlefield strewn withen killed and maimed (by his will as he believed), did he reckon ase looked at them how many Russians there were for each Frenchman and,eceiving himself, find reason for rejoicing in the calculation thathere were five Russians for every Frenchman. Not on that day aloneid he write in a letter to Paris that "the battle field wasuperb," because fifty thousand corpses lay there, but even on thesland of St. Helena in the peaceful solitude where he said hentended to devote his leisure to an account of the great deeds he hadone, he wrote:
	The Russian war should have been the most popular war of modernimes: it was a war of good sense, for real interests, for theranquillity and security of all; it was purely pacific andonservative.
	It was a war for a great cause, the end of uncertainties and theeginning of security. A new horizon and new labors were openingut, full of well-being and prosperity for all. The European systemas already founded; all that remained was to organize it.
	Satisfied on these great points and with tranquility everywhere, Ioo should have had my Congress and my Holy Alliance. Those ideas weretolen from me. In that reunion of great sovereigns we should haveiscussed our interests like one family, and have rendered accounto the peoples as clerk to master.
	Europe would in this way soon have been, in fact, but one people,nd anyone who traveled anywhere would have found himself always inhe common fatherland. I should have demanded the freedom of allavigable rivers for everybody, that the seas should be common to all,nd that the great standing armies should be reduced henceforth toere guards for the sovereigns.
	On returning to France, to the bosom of the great, strong,agnificent, peaceful, and glorious fatherland, I should haveroclaimed her frontiers immutable; all future wars purelyefensive, all aggrandizement antinational. I should have associatedy son in the Empire; my dictatorship would have been finished, andis constitutional reign would have begun.
	Paris would have been the capital of the world, and the French thenvy of the nations!
	My leisure then, and my old age, would have been devoted, in companyith the Empress and during the royal apprenticeship of my son, toeisurely visiting, with our own horses and like a true countryouple, every corner of the Empire, receiving complaints, redressingrongs, and scattering public buildings and benefactions on allides and everywhere.
	Napoleon, predestined by Providence for the gloomy role ofxecutioner of the peoples, assured himself that the aim of hisctions had been the peoples' welfare and that he could control theate of millions and by the employment of power confer benefactions.
	"Of four hundred thousand who crossed the Vistula," he wrote furtherf the Russian war, "half were Austrians, Prussians, Saxons, Poles,avarians, Wurttembergers, Mecklenburgers, Spaniards, Italians, andeapolitans. The Imperial army, strictly speaking, was one thirdomposed of Dutch, Belgians, men from the borders of the Rhine,iedmontese, Swiss, Genevese, Tuscans, Romans, inhabitants of thehirty-second Military Division, of Bremen, of Hamburg, and so on:t included scarcely a hundred and forty thousand who spoke French.he Russian expedition actually cost France less than fifty thousanden; the Russian army in its retreat from Vilna to Moscow lost inhe various battles four times more men than the French army; theurning of Moscow cost the lives of a hundred thousand Russians whoied of cold and want in the woods; finally, in its march fromoscow to the Oder the Russian army also suffered from the severity ofhe season; so that by the the time it reached Vilna it numberednly fifty thousand, and at Kalisch less than eighteen thousand."
	He imagined that the war with Russia came about by his will, and theorrors that occurred did not stagger his soul. He boldly took thehole responsibility for what happened, and his darkened mind foundustification in the belief that among the hundreds of thousands whoerished there were fewer Frenchmen than Hessians and Bavarians.BK10|CH39
	CHAPTER XXXIX
	Several tens of thousands of the slain lay in diverse postures andarious uniforms on the fields and meadows belonging to the Davydovamily and to the crown serfs- those fields and meadows where forundreds of years the peasants of Borodino, Gorki, Shevardino, andemenovsk had reaped their harvests and pastured their cattle. Athe dressing stations the grass and earth were soaked with blood for apace of some three acres around. Crowds of men of various arms,ounded and unwounded, with frightened faces, dragged themselvesack to Mozhaysk from the one army and back to Valuevo from the other.ther crowds, exhausted and hungry, went forward led by theirfficers. Others held their ground and continued to fire.
	Over the whole field, previously so gaily beautiful with the glitterf bayonets and cloudlets of smoke in the morning sun, there nowpread a mist of damp and smoke and a strange acid smell ofaltpeter and blood. Clouds gathered and drops of rain began to falln the dead and wounded, on the frightened, exhausted, andesitating men, as if to say: "Enough, men! Enough! Cease... bethinkourselves! What are you doing?"
	To the men of both sides alike, worn out by want of food and rest,t began equally to appear doubtful whether they should continue tolaughter one another; all the faces expressed hesitation, and theuestion arose in every soul: "For what, for whom, must I kill ande killed?... You may go and kill whom you please, but I don't want too so anymore!" By evening this thought had ripened in every soul.t any moment these men might have been seized with horror at whathey were doing and might have thrown up everything and run awaynywhere.
	But though toward the end of the battle the men felt all theorror of what they were doing, though they would have been glad toeave off, some incomprehensible, mysterious power continued toontrol them, and they still brought up the charges, loaded, aimed,nd applied the match, though only one artilleryman survived out ofvery three, and though they stumbled and panted with fatigue,erspiring and stained with blood and powder. The cannon balls flewust as swiftly and cruelly from both sides, crushing human bodies,nd that terrible work which was not done by the will of a man butt the will of Him who governs men and worlds continued.
	Anyone looking at the disorganized rear of the Russian army wouldave said that, if only the French made one more slight effort, itould disappear; and anyone looking at the rear of the French armyould have said that the Russians need only make one more slightffort and the French would be destroyed. But neither the French norhe Russians made that effort, and the flame of battle burned slowlyut.
	The Russians did not make that effort because they were notttacking the French. At the beginning of the battle they stoodlocking the way to Moscow and they still did so at the end of theattle as at the beginning. But even had the aim of the Russianseen to drive the French from their positions, they could not haveade this last effort, for all the Russian troops had been brokenp, there was no part of the Russian army that had not suffered in theattle, and though still holding their positions they had lost ONEALF of their army.
	The French, with the memory of all their former victories duringifteen years, with the assurance of Napoleon's invincibility, withhe consciousness that they had captured part of the battlefield andad lost only a quarter of their men and still had their Guardsntact, twenty thousand strong, might easily have made that effort.he French had attacked the Russian army in order to drive it from itsosition ought to have made that effort, for as long as the Russiansontinued to block the road to Moscow as before, the aim of the Frenchad not been attained and all their efforts and losses were in vain.ut the French did not make that effort. Some historians say thatapoleon need only have used his Old Guards, who were intact, andhe battle would have been won. To speak of what would have happenedad Napoleon sent his Guards is like talking of what would happen ifutumn became spring. It could not be. Napoleon did not give hisuards, not because he did not want to, but because it could not beone. All the generals, officers. and soldiers of the French army knewt could not be done, because the flagging spirit of the troopsould not permitit.
	It was not Napoleon alone who had experienced that nightmare feelingf the mighty arm being stricken powerless, but all the generals andoldiers of his army whether they had taken part in the battle or not,fter all their experience of previous battles- when after one tenthf such efforts the enemy had fled- experienced a similar feeling oferror before an enemy who, after losing HALF his men, stood ashreateningly at the end as at the beginning of the battle. Theoral force of the attacking French army was exhausted. Not thatort of victory which is defined by the capture of pieces ofaterial fastened to sticks, called standards, and of the ground onhich the troops had stood and were standing, but a moral victory thatonvinces the enemy of the moral superiority of his opponent and ofis own impotence was gained by the Russians at Borodino. The Frenchnvaders, like an infuriated animal that has in its onslaught received mortal wound, felt that they were perishing, but could not stop, anyore than the Russian army, weaker by one half, could help swerving.y impetus gained, the French army was still able to roll forward tooscow, but there, without further effort on the part of the Russians,t had to perish, bleeding from the mortal wound it had received atorodino. The direct consequence of the battle of Borodino wasapoleon's senseless flight from Moscow, his retreat along the oldmolensk road, the destruction of the invading army of five hundredhousand men, and the downfall of Napoleonic France, on which atorodino for the first time the hand of an opponent of stronger spiritad been laid.BK11	                             BOOK ELEVEN: 1812BK11|CH1
	CHAPTER I
	Absolute continuity of motion is not comprehensible to the humanind. Laws of motion of any kind become comprehensible to man onlyhen he examines arbitrarily selected elements of that motion; butt the same time, a large proportion of human error comes from therbitrary division of continuous motion into discontinuous elements.here is a well known, so-called sophism of the ancients consisting inhis, that Achilles could never catch up with a tortoise he wasollowing, in spite of the fact that he traveled ten times as fasts the tortoise. By the time Achilles has covered the distance thateparated him from the tortoise, the tortoise has covered one tenth ofhat distance ahead of him: when Achilles has covered that tenth,he tortoise has covered another one hundredth, and so on forever.his problem seemed to the ancients insoluble. The absurd answer (thatchilles could never overtake the tortoise) resulted from this: thatotion was arbitrarily divided into discontinuous elements, whereashe motion both of Achilles and of the tortoise was continuous.
	By adopting smaller and smaller elements of motion we onlypproach a solution of the problem, but never reach it. Only when weave admitted the conception of the infinitely small, and theesulting geometrical progression with a common ratio of one tenth,nd have found the sum of this progression to infinity, do we reach solution of the problem.
	A modern branch of mathematics having achieved the art of dealingith the infinitely small can now yield solutions in other moreomplex problems of motion which used to appear insoluble.
	This modern branch of mathematics, unknown to the ancients, whenealing with problems of motion admits the conception of thenfinitely small, and so conforms to the chief condition of motionabsolute continuity) and thereby corrects the inevitable errorhich the human mind cannot avoid when it deals with separate elementsf motion instead of examining continuous motion.
	In seeking the laws of historical movement just the same thingappens. The movement of humanity, arising as it does from innumerablerbitrary human wills, is continuous.
	To understand the laws of this continuous movement is the aim ofistory. But to arrive at these laws, resulting from the sum of allhose human wills, man's mind postulates arbitrary and disconnectednits. The first method of history is to take an arbitrarilyelected series of continuous events and examine it apart from others,hough there is and can be no beginning to any event, for one eventlways flows uninterruptedly from another.
	The second method is to consider the actions of some one man- a kingr a commander- as equivalent to the sum of many individual wills;hereas the sum of individual wills is never expressed by the activityf a single historic personage.
	Historical science in its endeavor to draw nearer to truthontinually takes smaller and smaller units for examination. Butowever small the units it takes, we feel that to take any unitisconnected from others, or to assume a beginning of anyhenomenon, or to say that the will of many men is expressed by thections of any one historic personage, is in itself false.
	It needs no critical exertion to reduce utterly to dust anyeductions drawn from history. It is merely necessary to select somearger or smaller unit as the subject of observation- as criticism hasvery right to do, seeing that whatever unit history observes mustlways be arbitrarily selected.
	Only by taking infinitesimally small units for observation (theifferential of history, that is, the individual tendencies of men)nd attaining to the art of integrating them (that is, finding the sumf these infinitesimals) can we hope to arrive at the laws of history.
	The first fifteen years of the nineteenth century in Europeresent an extraordinary movement of millions of people. Men leaveheir customary pursuits, hasten from one side of Europe to the other,lunder and slaughter one another, triumph and are plunged in despair,nd for some years the whole course of life is altered and presents anntensive movement which first increases and then slackens. What washe cause of this movement, by what laws was it governed? asks theind of man.
	The historians, replying to this question, lay before us the sayingsnd doings of a few dozen men in a building in the city of Paris,alling these sayings and doings "the Revolution"; then they give aetailed biography of Napoleon and of certain people favorable orostile to him; tell of the influence some of these people had onthers, and say: that is why this movement took place and those arets laws.
	But the mind of man not only refuses to believe this explanation,ut plainly says that this method of explanation is fallacious,ecause in it a weaker phenomenon is taken as the cause of a stronger.he sum of human wills produced the Revolution and Napoleon, andnly the sum of those wills first tolerated and then destroyed them.
	"But every time there have been conquests there have beenonquerors; every time there has been a revolution in any statehere have been great men," says history. And, indeed, human reasoneplies: every time conquerors appear there have been wars, but thisoes not prove that the conquerors caused the wars and that it isossible to find the laws of a war in the personal activity of aingle man. Whenever I look at my watch and its hands point to ten, hear the bells of the neighboring church; but because the bellsegin to ring when the hands of the clock reach ten, I have no righto assume that the movement of the bells is caused by the positionf the hands of the watch.
	Whenever I see the movement of a locomotive I hear the whistle andee the valves opening and wheels turning; but I have no right toonclude that the whistling and the turning of wheels are the cause ofhe movement of the engine.
	The peasants say that a cold wind blows in late spring because theaks are budding, and really every spring cold winds do blow whenhe oak is budding. But though I do not know what causes the coldinds to blow when the oak buds unfold, I cannot agree with theeasants that the unfolding of the oak buds is the cause of the coldind, for the force of the wind is beyond the influence of the buds. Iee only a coincidence of occurrences such as happens with all thehenomena of life, and I see that however much and however carefully Ibserve the hands of the watch, and the valves and wheels of thengine, and the oak, I shall not discover the cause of the bellsinging, the engine moving, or of the winds of spring. To that Iust entirely change my point of view and study the laws of theovement of steam, of the bells, and of the wind. History must dohe same. And attempts in this direction have already been made.
	To study the laws of history we must completely change the subjectf our observation, must leave aside kings, ministers, and generals,nd the common, infinitesimally small elements by which the masses areoved. No one can say in how far it is possible for man to advancen this way toward an understanding of the laws of history; but its evident that only along that path does the possibility ofiscovering the laws of history lie, and that as yet not a millionthart as much mental effort has been applied in this direction byistorians as has been devoted to describing the actions of variousings, commanders, and ministers and propounding the historians' owneflections concerning these actions.BK11|CH2
	CHAPTER II
	The forces of a dozen European nations burst into Russia. Theussian army and people avoided a collision till Smolensk was reached,nd again from Smolensk to Borodino. The French army pushed on tooscow, its goal, its impetus ever increasing as it neared its aim,ust as the velocity of a falling body increases as it approacheshe earth. Behind it were seven hundred miles of hunger-stricken,ostile country; ahead were a few dozen miles separating it from itsoal. Every soldier in Napoleon's army felt this and the invasionoved on by its own momentum.
	The more the Russian army retreated the more fiercely a spirit ofatred of the enemy flared up, and while it retreated the armyncreased and consolidated. At Borodino a collision took place.either army was broken up, but the Russian army retreated immediatelyfter the collision as inevitably as a ball recoils after collidingith another having a greater momentum, and with equal inevitabilityhe ball of invasion that had advanced with such momentum rolled onor some distance, though the collision had deprived it of all itsorce.
	The Russians retreated eighty miles- to beyond Moscow- and therench reached Moscow and there came to a standstill. For five weeksfter that there was not a single battle. The French did not move.s a bleeding, mortally wounded animal licks its wounds, they remainednert in Moscow for five weeks, and then suddenly, with no fresheason, fled back: they made a dash for the Kaluga road, and (after victory- for at Malo-Yaroslavets the field of conflict againemained theirs) without undertaking a single serious battle, theyled still more rapidly back to Smolensk, beyond Smolensk, beyondhe Berezina, beyond Vilna, and farther still.
	On the evening of the twenty-sixth of August, Kutuzov and thehole Russian army were convinced that the battle of Borodino was aictory. Kutuzov reported so to the Emperor. He gave orders to prepareor a fresh conflict to finish the enemy and did this not to deceivenyone, but because he knew that the enemy was beaten, as everyone whoad taken part in the battle knew it.
	But all that evening and next day reports came in one afternother of unheard-of losses, of the loss of half the army, and aresh battle proved physically impossible.
	It was impossible to give battle before information had beenollected, the wounded gathered in, the supplies of ammunitioneplenished, the slain reckoned up, new officers appointed toeplace those who had been killed, and before the men had had food andleep. And meanwhile, the very next morning after the battle, therench army advanced of itself upon the Russians, carried forward byhe force of its own momentum now seemingly increased in inverseroportion to the square of the distance from its aim. Kutuzov'sish was to attack next day, and the whole army desired to do so.ut to make an attack the wish to do so is not sufficient, thereust also be a possibility of doing it, and that possibility did notxist. It was impossible not to retreat a day's march, and then in theame way it was impossible not to retreat another and a third day'sarch, and at last, on the first of September when the army drewear Moscow- despite the strength of the feeling that had arisen inll ranks- the force of circumstances compelled it to retire beyondoscow. And the troops retired one more, last, day's march, andbandoned Moscow to the enemy.
	For people accustomed to think that plans of campaign and battlesre made by generals- as any one of us sitting over a map in his studyay imagine how he would have arranged things in this or thatattle- the questions present themselves: Why did Kutuzov during theetreat not do this or that? Why did he not take up a positionefore reaching Fili? Why did he not retire at once by the Kalugaoad, abandoning Moscow? and so on. People accustomed to think in thatay forget, or do not know, the inevitable conditions which alwaysimit the activities of any commander in chief. The activity of aommander in chief does not all resemble the activity we imagine tourselves when we sit at case in our studies examining some campaignn the map, with a certain number of troops on this and that side in aertain known locality, and begin our plans from some given moment. commander in chief is never dealing with the beginning of any event-he position from which we always contemplate it. The commander inhief is always in the midst of a series of shifting events and soe never can at any moment consider the whole import of an eventhat is occurring. Moment by moment the event is imperceptibly shapingtself, and at every moment of this continuous, uninterruptedhaping of events the commander in chief is in the midst of a mostomplex play of intrigues, worries, contingencies, authorities,rojects, counsels, threats, and deceptions and is continually obligedo reply to innumerable questions addressed to him, which constantlyonflict with one another.
	Learned military authorities quite seriously tell us that Kutuzovhould have moved his army to the Kaluga road long before reachingili, and that somebody actually submitted such a proposal to him. But commander in chief, especially at a difficult moment, has alwaysefore him not one proposal but dozens simultaneously. And all theseroposals, based on strategics and tactics, contradict each other.
	A commander in chief's business, it would seem, is simply tohoose one of these projects. But even that he cannot do. Events andime do not wait. For instance, on the twenty-eighth it is suggestedo him to cross to the Kaluga road, but just then an adjutantallops up from Miloradovich asking whether he is to engage the Frenchr retire. An order must be given him at once, that instant. And therder to retreat carries us past the turn to the Kaluga road. Andfter the adjutant comes the commissary general asking where thetores are to be taken, and the chief of the hospitals asks wherehe wounded are to go, and a courier from Petersburg brings a letterrom the sovereign which does not admit of the possibility ofbandoning Moscow, and the commander in chief's rival, the man whos undermining him (and there are always not merely one but severaluch), presents a new project diametrically opposed to that of turningo the Kaluga road, and the commander in chief himself needs sleep andefreshment to maintain his energy and a respectable general who haseen overlooked in the distribution of rewards comes to complain,nd the inhabitants of the district pray to be defended, and anfficer sent to inspect the locality comes in and gives a report quiteontrary to what was said by the officer previously sent; and a spy, arisoner, and a general who has been on reconnaissance, all describehe position of the enemy's army differently. People accustomed toisunderstand or to forget these inevitable conditions of aommander in chief's actions describe to us, for instance, theosition of the army at Fili and assume that the commander in chiefould, on the first of September, quite freely decide whether tobandon Moscow or defend it; whereas, with the Russian army lesshan four miles from Moscow, no such question existed. When had thatuestion been settled? At Drissa and at Smolensk and most palpablyf all on the twenty-fourth of August at Shevardino and on thewenty-sixth at Borodino, and each day and hour and minute of theetreat from Borodino to Fili.BK11|CH3
	CHAPTER III
	When Ermolov, having been sent by Kutuzov to inspect the position,old the field marshal that it was impossible to fight there beforeoscow and that they must retreat, Kutuzov looked at him in silence.
	"Give me your hand," said he and, turning it over so as to feelhe pulse, added: "You are not well, my dear fellow. Think what youre saying!"
	Kutuzov could not yet admit the possibility of retreating beyondoscow without a battle.
	On the Poklonny Hill, four miles from the Dorogomilov gate ofoscow, Kutuzov got out of his carriage and sat down on a bench by theoadside. A great crowd of generals gathered round him, and Countostopchin, who had come out from Moscow, joined them. Thisrilliant company separated into several groups who all discussedhe advantages and disadvantages of the position, the state of thermy, the plans suggested, the situation of Moscow, and militaryuestions generally. Though they had not been summoned for theurpose, and though it was not so called, they all felt that thisas really a council of war. The conversations all dealt with publicuestions. If anyone gave or asked for personal news, it was done in ahisper and they immediately reverted to general matters. No jokes, oraughter, or smiles even, were seen among all these men. Theyvidently all made an effort to hold themselves at the height theituation demanded. And all these groups, while talking amonghemselves, tried to keep near the commander in chief (whose benchormed the center of the gathering) and to speak so that he mightverhear them. The commander in chief listened to what was beingaid and sometimes asked them to repeat their remarks, but did notimself take part in the conversations or express any opinion. Afterearing what was being said by one or other of these groups heenerally turned away with an air of disappointment, as though theyere not speaking of anything he wished to hear. Some discussed theosition that had been chosen, criticizing not the position itselfo much as the mental capacity of those who had chosen it. Othersrgued that a mistake had been made earlier and that a battle shouldave been fought two days before. Others again spoke of the battlef Salamanca, which was described by Crosart, a newly arrivedrenchman in a Spanish uniform. (This Frenchman and one of theerman princes serving with the Russian army were discussing the siegef Saragossa and considering the possibility of defending Moscow in similar manner.) Count Rostopchin was telling a fourth group that heas prepared to die with the city train bands under the walls of theapital, but that he still could not help regretting having beeneft in ignorance of what was happening, and that had he known itooner things would have been different.... A fifth group,isplaying the profundity of their strategic perceptions, discussedhe direction the troops would now have to take. A sixth group wasalking absolute nonsense. Kutuzov's expression grew more and morereoccupied and gloomy. From all this talk he saw only one thing: thato defend Moscow was a physical impossibility in the full meaning ofhose words, that is to say, so utterly impossible that if anyenseless commander were to give orders to fight, confusion wouldesult but the battle would still not take place. It would not takelace because the commanders not merely all recognized the position toe impossible, but in their conversations were only discussing whatould happen after its inevitable abandonment. How could theommanders lead their troops to a field of battle they considered itmpossible to hold? The lower-grade officers and even the soldierswho too reason) also considered the position impossible and thereforeould not go to fight, fully convinced as they were of defeat. Ifennigsen insisted on the position being defended and others stilliscussed it, the question was no longer important in itself butnly as a pretext for disputes and intrigue. This Kutuzov knew well.
	Bennigsen, who had chosen the position, warmly displayed his Russianatriotism (Kutuzov could not listen to this without wincing) bynsisting that Moscow must be defended. His aim was as clear asaylight to Kutuzov: if the defense failed, to throw the blame onutuzov who had brought the army as far as the Sparrow Hills withoutiving battle; if it succeeded, to claim the success as his own; or ifattle were not given, to clear himself of the crime of abandoningoscow. But this intrigue did not now occupy the old man's mind. Oneerrible question absorbed him and to that question he heard noeply from anyone. The question for him now was: "Have I reallyllowed Napoleon to reach Moscow, and when did I do so? When was itecided? Can it have been yesterday when I ordered Platov toetreat, or was it the evening before, when I had a nap and toldennigsen to issue orders? Or was it earlier still?... When, whenas this terrible affair decided? Moscow must be abandoned. The armyust retreat and the order to do so must be given." To give thaterrible order seemed to him equivalent to resigning the command ofhe army. And not only did he love power to which he was accustomedthe honours awarded to Prince Prozorovski, under whom he had servedn Turkey, galled him), but he was convinced that he was destined toave Russia and that that was why, against the Emperor's wish and byhe will of the people, he had been chosen commander in chief. Heas convinced that he alone could maintain command of the army inhese difficult circumstances, and that in all the world he aloneould encounter the invincible Napoleon without fear, and he wasorrified at the thought of the order he had to issue. But somethingad to be decided, and these conversations around him which weressuming too free a character must be stopped.
	He called the most important generals to him.
	"My head, be it good or bad, must depend on itself," said he, risingrom the bench, and he rode to Fili where his carriages were waiting.BK11|CH4
	CHAPTERIV IV
	The Council of War began to assemble at two in the afternoon inhe better and roomier part of Andrew Savostyanov's hut. The men,omen, and children of the large peasant family crowded into theack room across the passage. Only Malasha, Andrew's six-year-oldranddaughter whom his Serene Highness had petted and to whom he hadiven a lump of sugar while drinking his tea, remained on the top ofhe brick oven in the larger room. Malasha looked down from the ovenith shy delight at the faces, uniforms, and decorations of theenerals, who one after another came into the room and sat down on theroad benches in the corner under the icons. "Granddad" himself, asalasha in her own mind called Kutuzov, sat apart in a dark cornerehind the oven. He sat, sunk deep in a folding armchair, andontinually cleared his throat and pulled at the collar of his coathich, though it was unbuttoned, still seemed to pinch his neck. Thoseho entered went up one by one to the field marshal; he pressed theands of some and nodded to others. His adjutant Kaysarov was about toraw back the curtain of the window facing Kutuzov, but the latteroved his hand angrily and Kaysarov understood that his Sereneighness did not wish his face to be seen.
	Round the peasant's deal table, on which lay maps, plans, pencils,nd papers, so many people gathered that the orderlies brought innother bench and put it beside the table. Ermolov, Kaysarov, andoll, who had just arrived, sat down on this bench. In the foremostlace, immediately under the icons, sat Barclay de Tolly, his highorehead merging into his bald crown. He had a St. George's Crossound his neck and looked pale and ill. He had been feverish for twoays and was now shivering and in pain. Beside him sat Uvarov, whoith rapid gesticulations was giving him some information, speaking inow tones as they all did. Chubby little Dokhturov was listeningttentively with eyebrows raised and arms folded on his stomach. Onhe other side sat Count Ostermann-Tolstoy, seemingly absorbed inis own thoughts. His broad head with its bold features and glitteringyes was resting on his hand. Raevski, twitching forward the blackair on his temples as was his habit, glanced now at Kutuzov and nowt the door with a look of impatience. Konovnitsyn's firm, handsome,nd kindly face was lit up by a tender, sly smile. His glance metalasha's, and the expression of his eyes caused the little girl tomile.
	They were all waiting for Bennigsen, who on the pretext ofnspecting the position was finishing his savory dinner. They waitedor him from four till six o'clock and did not begin theireliberations all that time talked in low tones of other matters.
	Only when Bennigsen had entered the hut did Kutuzov leave his cornernd draw toward the table, but not near enough for the candles thatad been placed there to light up his face.
	Bennigsen opened the council with the question: "Are we to abandonussia's ancient and sacred capital without a struggle, or are we toefend it?" A prolonged and general silence followed. There was arown on every face and only Kutuzov's angry grunts and occasionalough broke the silence. All eyes were gazing at him. Malasha tooooked at "Granddad." She was nearest to him and saw how his faceuckered; he seemed about to cry, but this did not last long.
	"Russia's ancient and sacred capital!" he suddenly said, repeatingennigsen's words in an angry voice and thereby drawing attention tohe false note in them. "Allow me to tell you, your excellency, thathat question has no meaning for a Russian." (He lurched his heavyody forward.) "Such a question cannot be put; it is senseless! Theuestion I have asked these gentlemen to meet to discuss is a militaryne. The question is that of saving Russia. Is it better to give uposcow without a battle, or by accepting battle to risk losing thermy as well as Moscow? That is the question on which I want yourpinion," and he sank back in his chair.
	The discussion began. Bennigsen did not yet consider his gameost. Admitting the view of Barclay and others that a defensive battlet Fili was impossible, but imbued with Russian patriotism and theove of Moscow, he proposed to move troops from the right to theeft flank during the night and attack the French right flank theollowing day. Opinions were divided, and arguments were advancedor and against that project. Ermolov, Dokhturov, and Raevski agreedith Bennigsen. Whether feeling it necessary to make a sacrificeefore abandoning the capital or guided by other, personalonsiderations, these generals seemed not to understand that thisouncil could not alter the inevitable course of events and thatoscow was in effect already abandoned. The other generals, however,nderstood it and, leaving aside the question of Moscow, of theirection the army should take in its retreat. Malasha, who kept heryes fixed on what was going on before her, understood the meaningf the council differently. It seemed to her that it was only aersonal struggle between "Granddad" and "Long-coat" as she termedennigsen. She saw that they grew spiteful when they spoke to onenother, and in her heart she sided with "Granddad." In the midst ofhe conversation she noticed "Granddad" give Bennigsen a quick, subtlelance, and then to her joys he saw that "Granddad" said somethingo "Long-coat" which settled him. Bennigsen suddenly reddened andaced angrily up and down the room. What so affected him was Kutuzov'salm and quiet comment on the advantage or disadvantage of Bennigsen'sroposal to move troops by night from the right to the left flank tottack the French right wing.
	"Gentlemen," said Kutuzov, "I cannot approve of the count's plan.oving troops in close proximity to an enemy is always dangerous,nd military history supports that view. For instance..." Kutuzoveemed to reflect, searching for an example, then with a clear,aive look at Bennigsen he added: "Oh yes; take the battle ofriedland, which I think the count well remembers, and which was...ot fully successful, only because our troops were rearranged too nearhe enemy..."
	There followed a momentary pause, which seemed very long to themll.
	The discussion recommenced, but pauses frequently occurred andhey all felt that there was no more to be said.
	During one of these pauses Kutuzov heaved a deep sigh as ifreparing to speak. They all looked at him.
	"Well, gentlemen, I see that it is I who will have to pay for theroken crockery," said he, and rising slowly he moved to the table.Gentlemen, I have heard your views. Some of you will not agree withe. But I," he paused, "by the authority entrusted to me by myovereign and country, order a retreat."
	After that the generals began to disperse with the solemnity andircumspect silence of people who are leaving, after a funeral.
	Some of the generals, in low tones and in a strain very differentrom the way they had spoken during the council, communicatedomething to their commander in chief.
	Malasha, who had long been expected for supper, climbed carefullyackwards down from the oven, her bare little feet catching at itsrojections, and slipping between the legs of the generals shearted out of the room.
	When he had dismissed the generals Kutuzov sat a long time withis elbows on the table, thinking always of the same terribleuestion: "When, when did the abandonment of Moscow become inevitable?hen was that done which settled the matter? And who was to blameor it?"
	"I did not expect this," said he to his adjutant Schneider whenhe latter came in late that night. "I did not expect this! I didot think this would happen."
	"You should take some rest, your Serene Highness," repliedchneider.
	"But no! They shall eat horseflesh yet, like the Turks!" exclaimedutuzov without replying, striking the table with his podgy fist.They shall too, if only..."BK11|CH5
	CHAPTER V
	At that very time, in circumstances even more important thanetreating without a battle, namely the evacuation and burning ofoscow, Rostopchin, who is usually represented as being the instigatorf that event, acted in an altogether different manner from Kutuzov.
	After the battle of Borodino the abandonment and burning of Moscowas as inevitable as the retreat of the army beyond Moscow withoutighting.
	Every Russian might have predicted it, not by reasoning but by theeeling implanted in each of us and in our fathers.
	The same thing that took place in Moscow had happened in all theowns and villages on Russian soil beginning with Smolensk, withouthe participation of Count Rostopchin and his broadsheets. Theeople awaited the enemy unconcernedly, did not riot or become excitedr tear anyone to pieces, but faced its fate, feeling within it thetrength to find what it should do at that most difficult moment.nd as soon as the enemy drew near the wealthy classes went awaybandoning their property, while the poorer remained and burned andestroyed what was left.
	The consciousness that this would be so and would always be so wasnd is present in the heart of every Russian. And a consciousness ofhis, and a foreboding that Moscow would be taken, was present inussian Moscow society in 1812. Those who had quitted Moscow alreadyn July and at the beginning of August showed that they expected this.hose who went away, taking what they could and abandoning theirouses and half their belongings, did so from the latent patriotismhich expresses itself not by phrases or by giving one's children toave the fatherland and similar unnatural exploits, but unobtrusively,imply, organically, and therefore in the way that always produces theost powerful results.
	"It is disgraceful to run away from danger; only cowards are runningway from Moscow," they were told. In his broadsheets Rostopchinmpressed on them that to leave Moscow was shameful. They were ashamedo be called cowards, ashamed to leave, but still they left, knowingt had to be done. Why did they go? It is impossible to suppose thatostopchin had scared them by his accounts of horrors Napoleon hadommitted in conquered countries. The first people to go away were theich educated people who knew quite well that Vienna and Berlin hademained intact and that during Napoleon's occupation thenhabitants had spent their time pleasantly in the company of theharming Frenchmen whom the Russians, and especially the Russianadies, then liked so much.
	They went away because for Russians there could be no question as tohether things would go well or ill under French rule in Moscow. Itas out of the question to be under French rule, it would be the worsthing that could happen. They went away even before the battle oforodino and still more rapidly after it, despite Rostopchin's callso defend Moscow or the announcement of his intention to take theonder-working icon of the Iberian Mother of God and go to fight, orf the balloons that were to destroy the French, and despite all theonsense Rostopchin wrote in his broadsheets. They knew that it wasor the army to fight, and that if it could not succeed it would noto to take young ladies and house serfs to the Three Hills quarterf Moscow to fight Napoleon, and that they must go away, sorry as theyere to abandon their property to destruction. They went awayithout thinking of the tremendous significance of that immense andealthy city being given over to destruction, for a great city withooden buildings was certain when abandoned by its inhabitants to beurned. They went away each on his own account, and yet it was only inonsequence of their going away that the momentous event wasccomplished that will always remain the greatest glory of the Russianeople. The lady who, afraid of being stopped by Count Rostopchin'srders, had already in June moved with her Negroes and her womenesters from Moscow to her Saratov estate, with a vagueonsciousness that she was not Bonaparte's servant, was really,imply, and truly carrying out the great work which saved Russia.ut Count Rostopchin, who now taunted those who left Moscow and nowad the government offices removed; now distributed quite uselesseapons to the drunken rabble; now had processions displaying thecons, and now forbade Father Augustin to remove icons or the relicsf saints; now seized all the private carts in Moscow and on oneundred and thirty-six of them removed the balloon that was beingonstructed by Leppich; now hinted that he would burn Moscow andelated how he had set fire to his own house; now wrote a proclamationo the French solemnly upbraiding them for having destroyed hisrphanage; now claimed the glory of having hinted that he would burnoscow and now repudiated the deed; now ordered the people to catchll spies and bring them to him, and now reproached them for doing so;ow expelled all the French residents from Moscow, and now allowedadame Aubert-Chalme (the center of the whole French colony in Moscow)o remain, but ordered the venerable old postmaster Klyucharev to berrested and exiled for no particular offense; now assembled theeople at the Three Hills to fight the French and now, to get rid ofhem, handed over to them a man to be killed and himself drove away by back gate; now declared that he would not survive the fall ofoscow, and now wrote French verses in albums concerning his sharen the affair- this man did not understand the meaning of what wasappening but merely wanted to do something himself that wouldstonish people, to perform some patriotically heroic feat; and like ahild he made sport of the momentous, and unavoidable event- thebandonment and burning of Moscow- and tried with his puny hand now topeed and now to stay the enormous, popular tide that bore him alongith it.BK11|CH6
	CHAPTER VI
	Helene, having returned with the court from Vilna to Petersburg,ound herself in a difficult position.
	In Petersburg she had enjoyed the special protection of a grandeeho occupied one of the highest posts in the Empire. In Vilna shead formed an intimacy with a young foreign prince. When sheeturned to Petersburg both the magnate and the prince were there, andoth claimed their rights. Helene was faced by a new problem- how toreserve her intimacy with both without offending either.
	What would have seemed difficult or even impossible to another womanid not cause the least embarrassment to Countess Bezukhova, whovidently deserved her reputation of being a very clever woman. Hadhe attempted concealment, or tried to extricate herself from herwkward position by cunning, she would have spoiled her case bycknowledging herself guilty. But Helene, like a really great manho can do whatever he pleases, at once assumed her own position to beorrect, as she sincerely believed it to be, and that everyone elseas to blame.
	The first time the young foreigner allowed himself to reproacher, she lifted her beautiful head and, half turning to him, saidirmly: "That's just like a man- selfish and cruel! I expected nothinglse. A woman sacrifices herself for you, she suffers, and this is hereward! What right have you, monseigneur, to demand an account of myttachments and friendships? He is a man who has been more than aather to me!" The prince was about to say something, but Helenenterrupted him.
	"Well, yes," said she, "it may be that he has other sentiments fore than those of a father, but that is not a reason for me to shuty door on him. I am not a man, that I should repay kindness withngratitude! Know, monseigneur, that in all that relates to myntimate feelings I render account only to God and to myonscience," she concluded, laying her hand on her beautiful, fullyxpanded bosom and looking up to heaven.
	"But for heaven's sake listen to me!"
	"Marry me, and I will be your slave!"
	"But that's impossible."
	"You won't deign to demean yourself by marrying me, you..." saidelene, beginning to cry.
	The prince tried to comfort her, but Helene, as if quite distraught,aid through her tears that there was nothing to prevent her marrying,hat there were precedents (there were up to that time very few, buthe mentioned Napoleon and some other exalted personages), that shead never been her husband's wife, and that she had been sacrificed.
	"But the law, religion..." said the prince, already yielding.
	"The law, religion... What have they been invented for if they can'trrange that?" said Helene.
	The prince was surprised that so simple an idea had not occurredo him, and he applied for advice to the holy brethren of theociety of Jesus, with whom he was on intimate terms.
	A few days later at one of those enchanting fetes which Heleneave at her country house on the Stone Island, the charming Monsieure Jobert, a man no longer young, with snow white hair and brilliantlack eyes, a Jesuit a robe courte* was presented to her, and in thearden by the light of the illuminations and to the sound of musicalked to her for a long time of the love of God, of Christ, of theacred Heart, and of the consolations the one true Catholic religionffords in this world and the next. Helene was touched, and morehan once tears rose to her eyes and to those of Monsieur de Jobertnd their voices trembled. A dance, for which her partner came to seeker, put an end to her discourse with her future directeur deonscience, but the next evening Monsieur de Jobert came to see Helenehen she was alone, and after that often came again.
	*Lay member of the Society of Jesus.
	One day he took the countess to a Roman Catholic church, where shenelt down before the altar to which she was led. The enchanting,iddle-aged Frenchman laid his hands on her head and, as she herselffterward described it, she felt something like a fresh breezeafted into her soul. It was explained to her that this was la grace.
	After that a long-frocked abbe was brought to her. She confessedo him, and he absolved her from her sins. Next day she received a boxontaining the Sacred Host, which was left at her house for her toartake of. A few days later Helene learned with pleasure that she hadow been admitted to the true Catholic Church and that in a few dayshe Pope himself would hear of her and would send her a certainocument.
	All that was done around her and to her at this time, all thettention devoted to her by so many clever men and expressed in suchleasant, refined ways, and the state of dove-like purity she wasow in (she wore only white dresses and white ribbons all that time)ave her pleasure, but her pleasure did not cause her for a momento forget her aim. And as it always happens in contests of cunninghat a stupid person gets the better of cleverer ones, Helene-aving realized that the main object of all these words and all thisrouble was, after converting her to Catholicism, to obtain money fromer for Jesuit institutions (as to which she received indications)-efore parting with her money insisted that the various operationsecessary to free her from her husband should be performed. In heriew the aim of every religion was merely to preserve certainroprieties while affording satisfaction to human desires. And withhis aim, in one of her talks with her Father Confessor, shensisted on an answer to the question, in how far was she bound by herarriage?
	They were sitting in the twilight by a window in the drawing room.he scent of flowers came in at the window. Helene was wearing a whiteress, transparent over her shoulders and bosom. The abbe, aell-fed man with a plump, clean-shaven chin, a pleasant firm mouth,nd white hands meekly folded on his knees, sat close to Helene and,ith a subtle smile on his lips and a peaceful look of delight ater beauty, occasionally glanced at her face as he explained hispinion on the subject. Helene with an uneasy smile looked at hisurly hair and his plump, clean-shaven, blackish cheeks and everyoment expected the conversation to take a fresh turn. But the abbe,hough he evidently enjoyed the beauty of his companion, wasbsorbed in his mastery of the matter.
	The course of the Father Confessor's arguments ran as follows:Ignorant of the import of what you were undertaking, you made a vowf conjugal fidelity to a man who on his part, by entering the marriedtate without faith in the religious significance of marriage,ommitted an act of sacrilege. That marriage lacked the dualignificance it should have had. Yet in spite of this your vow wasinding. You swerved from it. What did you commit by so acting? Aenial, or a mortal, sin? A venial sin, for you acted without evilntention. If now you married again with the object of bearinghildren, your sin might be forgiven. But the question is again awofold one: firstly..."
	But suddenly Helene, who was getting bored, said with one of herewitching smiles: "But I think that having espoused the true religion cannot be bound by what a false religion laid upon me."
	The director of her conscience was astounded at having the caseresented to him thus with the simplicity of Columbus' egg. He waselighted at the unexpected rapidity of his pupil's progress, butould not abandon the edifice of argument he had laboriouslyonstructed.
	"Let us understand one another, Countess," said he with a smile, andegan refuting his spiritual daughter's arguments.BK11|CH7
	CHAPTER VII
	Helene understood that the question was very simple and easy fromhe ecclesiastical point of view, and that her directors were makingifficulties only because they were apprehensive as to how theatter would be regarded by the secular authorities.
	So she decided that it was necessary to prepare the opinion ofociety. She provoked the jealousy of the elderly magnate and told himhat she had told her other suitor; that is, she put the matter sohat the only way for him to obtain a right over her was to marry her.he elderly magnate was at first as much taken aback by thisuggestion of marriage with a woman whose husband was alive, as theounger man had been, but Helene's imperturbable conviction that itas as simple and natural as marrying a maiden had its effect on himoo. Had Helene herself shown the least sign of hesitation, shame,r secrecy, her cause would certainly have been lost; but not only didhe show no signs of secrecy or shame, on the contrary, withood-natured naivete she told her intimate friends (and these were alletersburg) that both the prince and the magnate had proposed to hernd that she loved both and was afraid of grieving either.
	A rumor immediately spread in Petersburg, not that Helene wantedo be divorced from her husband (had such a report spread many wouldave opposed so illegal an intention) but simply that thenfortunate and interesting Helene was in doubt which of the two menhe should marry. The question was no longer whether this wasossible, but only which was the better match and how the matter woulde regarded at court. There were, it is true, some rigid individualsnable to rise to the height of such a question, who saw in theroject a desecration of the sacrament of marriage, but there were notany such and they remained silent, while the majority were interestedn Helene's good fortune and in the question which match would behe more advantageous. Whether it was right or wrong to remarryhile one had a husband living they did not discuss, for that questionad evidently been settled by people "wiser than you or me," as theyaid, and to doubt the correctness of that decision would be to riskxposing one's stupidity and incapacity to live in society.
	Only Marya Dmitrievna Akhrosimova, had come to Petersburg thatummer to see one of her sons, allowed herself plainly to express anpinion contrary to the general one. Meeting Helene at a ball shetopped her in the middle of the room and, amid general silence,aid in her gruff voice: "So wives of living men have started marryinggain! Perhaps you think you have invented a novelty? You have beenorestalled, my dear! It was thought of long ago. It is done in allhe brothels," and with these words Marya Dmitrievna, turning up heride sleeves with her usual threatening gesture and glancing sternlyound, moved across the room.
	Though people were afraid of Marya Dmitrievna she was regarded inetersburg as a buffoon, and so of what she had said they onlyoticed, and repeated in a whisper, the one coarse word she hadsed, supposing the whole sting of her remark to lie in that word.
	Prince Vasili, who of late very often forgot what he had said andepeated one and the same thing a hundred times, remarked to hisaughter whenever he chanced to see her:
	"Helene, I have a word to say to you," and he would lead herside, drawing her hand downward. "I have heard of certain projectsoncerning... you know. Well my dear child, you know how your father'seart rejoices to know that you... You have suffered so much....ut, my dear child, consult only your own heart. That is all I have toay," and concealing his unvarying emotion he would press his cheekgainst his daughter's and move away.
	Bilibin, who had not lost his reputation of an exceedingly cleveran, and who was one of one of the disinterested friends sorilliant a woman as Helene always has- men friends who can neverhange into lovers- once gave her his view of the matter at a smallnd intimate gathering.
	"Listen, Bilibin," said Helene (she always called friends of thatort by their surnames), and she touched his coat sleeve with herhite, beringed fingers. "Tell me, as you would a sister, what I oughto do. Which of the two?"
	Bilibin wrinkled up the skin over his eyebrows and pondered, with smile on his lips.
	"You are not taking me unawares, you know," said he. "As a trueriend, I have thought and thought again about your affair. You see,f you marry the prince"- he meant the younger man- and he crooked oneinger, "you forever lose the chance of marrying the other, and youill displease the court besides. (You know there is some kind ofonnection.) But if you marry the old count you will make his lastays happy, and as widow of the Grand... the prince would no longer beaking a mesalliance by marrying you," and Bilibin smoothed out hisorehead.
	"That's a true friend!" said Helene beaming, and again touchingilibin's sleeve. "But I love them, you know, and don't want toistress either of them. I would give my life for the happiness ofhem both."
	Bilibin shrugged his shoulders, as much as to say that not even heould help in that difficulty.
	"Une maitresse-femme!* That's what is called putting thingsquarely. She would like to be married to all three at the same time,"hought he.
	*A masterly woman.
	"But tell me, how will your husband look at the matter?" Bilibinsked, his reputation being so well established that he did not fearo ask so naive a question. "Will he agree?"
	"Oh, he loves me so!" said Helene, who for some reason imagined thatierre too loved her. "He will do anything for me."
	Bilibin puckered his skin in preparation for something witty.
	"Even divorce you?" said he.
	Helene laughed.
	Among those who ventured to doubt the justifiability of the proposedarriage was Helene's mother, Princess Kuragina. She was continuallyormented by jealousy of her daughter, and now that jealousy concerned subject near to her own heart, she could not reconcile herself tohe idea. She consulted a Russian priest as to the possibility ofivorce and remarriage during a husband's lifetime, and the priestold her that it was impossible, and to her delight showed her aext in the Gospel which (as it seemed to him) plainly remarriagehile the husband is alive.
	Armed with these arguments, which appeared to her unanswerable,he drove to her daughter's early one morning so as to find her alone.
	Having listened to her mother's objections, Helene smiled blandlynd ironically.
	"But it says plainly: 'Whosoever shall marry her that isivorced...'" said the old princess.
	"Ah, Maman, ne dites pas de betises. Vous ne comprenez rein. Dans maosition j'ai des devoirs,"* said Helene changing from Russian, inhich language she always felt that her case did not sound quitelear, into French which suited it better.
	*"Oh, Mamma, don't talk nonsense! You don't understand anything.n my position I have obligations.
	"But, my dear...."
	"Oh, Mamma, how is it you don't understand that the Holy Father, whoas the right to grant dispensations..."
	Just then the lady companion who lived with Helene came in tonnounce that His Highness was in the ballroom and wished to see her.
	"Non, dites-lui que je ne veux pas le voir, que je suis furieuseontre lui, parce qu'il m' a manque parole."*
	*"No, tell him I don't wish to see him, I am furious with him forot keeping his word to me."
	"Comtesse, a tout peche misericorde,"* said a fair-haired youngan with a long face and nose, as he entered the room.
	*"Countess, there is mercy for every sin."
	The old princess rose respectfully and curtsied. The young man whoad entered took no notice of her. The princess nodded to her daughternd sidled out of the room.
	"Yes, she is right," thought the old princess, all her convictionsissipated by the appearance of His Highness. "She is right, but hows it that we in our irrecoverable youth did not know it? Yet it is soimple," she thought as she got into her carriage.
	By the beginning of August Helene's affairs were clearly defined andhe wrote a letter to her husband- who, as she imagined, loved herery much- informing him of her intention to marry N.N. and of heraving embraced the one true faith, and asking him to carry out allhe formalities necessary for a divorce, which would be explained toim by the bearer of the letter.
	And so I pray God to have you, my friend, in His holy and powerfuleeping- Your friend Helene.
	This letter was brought to Pierre's house when he was on the fieldf Borodino.BK11|CH8
	CHAPTER VIII
	Toward the end of the battle of Borodino, Pierre, having run downrom Raevski's battery a second time, made his way through a gullyo Knyazkovo with a crowd of soldiers, reached the dressing station,nd seeing blood and hearing cries and groans hurried on, stillntangled in the crowds of soldiers.
	The one thing he now desired with his whole soul was to get awayuickly from the terrible sensations amid which he had lived thatay and return to ordinary conditions of life and sleep quietly in aoom in his own bed. He felt that only in the ordinary conditions ofife would he be able to understand himself and all he had seen andelt. But such ordinary conditions of life were nowhere to be found.
	Though shells and bullets did not whistle over the road alonghich he was going, still on all sides there was what there had beenn the field of battle. There were still the same suffering,xhausted, and sometimes strangely indifferent faces, the samelood, the same soldiers' overcoats, the same sounds of firinghich, though distant now, still aroused terror, and besides thishere were the foul air and the dust.
	Having gone a couple of miles along the Mozhaysk road, Pierre satown by the roadside.
	Dusk had fallen, and the roar of guns died away. Pierre layeaning on his elbow for a long time, gazing at the shadows that movedast him in the darkness. He was continually imagining that a cannonall was flying toward him with a terrific whizz, and then hehuddered and sat up. He had no idea how long he had been there. Inhe middle of the night three soldiers, having brought someirewood, settled down near him and began lighting a fire.
	The soldiers, who threw sidelong glances at Pierre, got the fireo burn and placed an iron pot on it into which they broke someried bread and put a little dripping. The pleasant odor of greasyiands mingled with the smell of smoke. Pierre sat up and sighed.he three soldiers were eating and talking among themselves, taking nootice of him.
	"And who may you be?" one of them suddenly asked Pierre, evidentlyeaning what Pierre himself had in mind, namely: "If you want to eate'll give you some food, only let us know whether you are an honestan."
	"I, I..." said Pierre, feeling it necessary to minimize his socialosition as much as possible so as to be nearer to the soldiers andetter understood by them. "By rights I am a militia officer, but myen are not here. I came to the battle and have lost them."
	"There now!" said one of the soldiers.
	Another shook his head.
	"Would you like a little mash?" the first soldier asked, andanded Pierre a wooden spoon after licking it clean.
	Pierre sat down by the fire and began eating the mash, as theyalled the food in the cauldron, and he thought it more delicious thanny food he had ever tasted. As he sat bending greedily over it,elping himself to large spoonfuls and chewing one after another,is was lit up by the fire and the soldiers looked at him in silence.
	"Where have you to go to? Tell us!" said one of them.
	"To Mozhaysk."
	"You're a gentleman, aren't you?"
	"Yes."
	"And what's your name?"
	"Peter Kirilych."
	"Well then, Peter Kirilych, come along with us, we'll take youhere."
	In the total darkness the soldiers walked with Pierre to Mozhaysk.
	By the time they got near Mozhaysk and began ascending the steepill into the town, the cocks were already crowing. Pierre went onith the soldiers, quite forgetting that his inn was at the bottomf the hill and that he had already passed it. He would not soonave remembered this, such was his state of forgetfulness, had heot halfway up the hill stumbled upon his groom, who had been toook for him in the town and was returning to the inn. The groomecognized Pierre in the darkness by his white hat.
	"Your excellency!" he said. "Why, we were beginning to despair!ow is it you are on foot? And where are you going, please?"
	"Oh, yes!" said Pierre.
	The soldiers stopped.
	"So you've found your folk?" said one of them. "Well, good-by, Peteririlych- isn't it?"
	"Good-by, Peter Kirilych!" Pierre heard the other voices repeat.
	"Good-by!" he said and turned with his groom toward the inn.
	"I ought to give them something!" he thought, and felt in hisocket. "No, better not!" said another, inner voice.
	There was not a room to be had at the inn, they were all occupied.ierre went out into the yard and, covering himself up head and all,ay down in his carriage.BK11|CH9
	CHAPTER IX
	Scarcely had Pierre laid his head on the pillow before he feltimself falling asleep, but suddenly, almost with the distinctnessf reality, he heard the boom, boom, boom of firing, the thud ofrojectiles, groans and cries, and smelled blood and powder, and aeeling of horror and dread of death seized him. Filled with fright hepened his eyes and lifted his head from under his cloak. All wasranquil in the yard. Only someone's orderly passed through theateway, splashing through the mud, and talked to the innkeeper. Aboveierre's head some pigeons, disturbed by the movement he had made initting up, fluttered under the dark roof of the penthouse. Thehole courtyard was permeated by a strong peaceful smell of stableards, delightful to Pierre at that moment. He could see the cleartarry sky between the dark roofs of two penthouses.
	"Thank God, there is no more of that!" he thought, covering up hisead again. "Oh, what a terrible thing is fear, and how shamefully Iielded to it! But they... they were steady and calm all the time,o the end..." thought he.
	They, in Pierre's mind, were the soldiers, those who had been at theattery, those who had given him food, and those who had prayed beforehe icon. They, those strange men he had not previously known, stoodut clearly and sharply from everyone else.
	"To be a soldier, just a soldier!" thought Pierre as he fell asleep,to enter communal life completely, to be imbued by what makes themhat they are. But how cast off all the superfluous, devilish burdenf my outer man? There was a time when I could have done it. I couldave run away from my father, as I wanted to. Or I might have beenent to serve as a soldier after the duel with Dolokhov." And theemory of the dinner at the English Club when he had challengedolokhov flashed through Pierre's mind, and then he remembered hisenefactor at Torzhok. And now a picture of a solemn meeting of theodge presented itself to his mind. It was taking place at the Englishlub and someone near and dear to him sat at the end of the table.Yes, that is he! It is my benefactor. But he died!" thought Pierre.Yes, he died, and I did not know he was alive. How sorry I am that heied, and how glad I am that he is alive again!" On one side of theable sat Anatole, Dolokhov, Nesvitski, Denisov, and others likehem (in his dream the category to which these men belonged was aslearly defined in his mind as the category of those he termedhey), and he heard those people, Anatole and Dolokhov, shouting andinging loudly; yet through their shouting the voice of his benefactoras heard speaking all the time and the sound of his words was aseighty and uninterrupted as the booming on the battlefield, butleasant and comforting. Pierre did not understand what his benefactoras saying, but he knew (the categories of thoughts were also quiteistinct in his dream) that he was talking of goodness and theossibility of being what they were. And they with their simple, kind,irm faces surrounded his benefactor on all sides. But though theyere kindly they did not look at Pierre and did not know him.ishing to speak and to attract their attention, he got up, but athat moment his legs grew cold and bare.He felt ashamed, and with one arm covered his legs from which hisloak had in fact slipped. For a moment as he was rearranging hisloak Pierre opened his eyes and saw the same penthouse roofs,osts, and yard, but now they were all bluish, lit up, andlittering with frost or dew.
	"It is dawn," thought Pierre. "But that's not what I want. I want toear and understand my benefactor's words." Again he covered himselfp with his cloak, but now neither the lodge nor his benefactor washere. There were only thoughts clearly expressed in words, thoughtshat someone was uttering or that he himself was formulating.
	Afterwards when he recalled those thoughts Pierre was convinced thatomeone outside himself had spoken them, though the impressions ofhat day had evoked them. He had never, it seemed to him, been able tohink and express his thoughts like that when awake.
	"To endure war is the most difficult subordination of man'sreedom to the law of God," the voice had said. "Simplicity isubmission to the will of God; you cannot escape from Him. And theyre simple. They do not talk, but act. The spoken word is silver buthe unspoken is golden. Man can be master of nothing while he fearseath, but he who does not fear it possesses all. If there were nouffering, man would not know his limitations, would not know himself.he hardest thing [Pierre went on thinking, or hearing, in hisream] is to be able in your soul to unite the meaning of all. Tonite all?" he asked himself. "No, not to unite. Thoughts cannot benited, but to harness all these thoughts together is what we need!es, one must harness them, must harness them!" he repeated to himselfith inward rapture, feeling that these words and they alone expressedhat he wanted to say and solved the question that tormented him.
	"Yes, one must harness, it is time to harness."
	"Time to harness, time to harness, your excellency! Yourxcellency!" some voice was repeating. "We must harness, it is time toarness...."
	It was the voice of the groom, trying to wake him. The sun shonetraight into Pierre's face. He glanced at the dirty innyard in theiddle of which soldiers were watering their lean horses at the pumphile carts were passing out of the gate. Pierre turned away withepugnance, and closing his eyes quickly fell back on the carriageeat. "No, I don't want that, I don't want to see and understand that. want to understand what was revealing itself to me in my dream.ne second more and I should have understood it all! But what am Io do? Harness, but how can I harness everything?" and Pierre feltith horror that the meaning of all he had seen and thought in theream had been destroyed.
	The groom, the coachman, and the innkeeper told Pierre that anfficer had come with news that the French were already nearozhaysk and that our men were leaving it.
	Pierre got up and, having told them to harness and overtake him,ent on foot through the town.
	The troops were moving on, leaving about ten thousand wounded behindhem. There were wounded in the yards, at the windows of the houses,nd the streets were crowded with them. In the streets, around cartshat were to take some of the wounded away, shouts, curses, andlows could be heard. Pierre offered the use of his carriage, whichad overtaken him, to a wounded general he knew, and drove with him tooscow. On the way Pierre was told of the death of hisrother-in-law Anatole and of that of Prince Andrew.BK11|CH10
	CHAPTER X
	On the thirteenth of August Pierre reached Moscow. Close to theates of the city he was met by Count Rostopchin's adjutant.
	"We have been looking for you everywhere," said the adjutant. "Theount wants to see you particularly. He asks you to come to him atnce on a very important matter."
	Without going home, Pierre took a cab and drove to see the Moscowommander in chief.
	Count Rostopchin had only that morning returned to town from hisummer villa at Sokolniki. The anteroom and reception room of hisouse were full of officials who had been summoned or had come forrders. Vasilchikov and Platov had already seen the count andxplained to him that it was impossible to defend Moscow and that itould have to be surrendered. Though this news was being concealedrom the inhabitants, the officials- the heads of the variousovernment departments- knew that Moscow would soon be in thenemy's hands, just as Count Rostopchin himself knew it, and to escapeersonal responsibility they had all come to the governor to ask howhey were to deal with their various departments.
	As Pierre was entering the reception room a courier from the armyame out of Rostopchin's private room.
	In answer to questions with which he was greeted, the courier made aespairing gesture with his hand and passed through the room.
	While waiting in the reception room Pierre with weary eyes watchedhe various officials, old and young, military and civilian, whoere there. They all seemed dissatisfied and uneasy. Pierre went up to group of men, one of whom he knew. After greeting Pierre theyontinued their conversation.
	"If they're sent out and brought back again later on it will do noarm, but as things are now one can't answer for anything."
	"But you see what he writes..." said another, pointing to arinted sheet he held in his hand.
	"That's another matter. That's necessary for the people," said theirst.
	"What is it?" asked Pierre.
	"Oh, it's a fresh broadsheet."
	Pierre took it and began reading.
	His Serene Highness has passed through Mozhaysk in order to joinp with the troops moving toward him and has taken up a strongosition where the enemy will not soon attack him. Forty eight gunsith ammunition have been sent him from here, and his Sereneighness says he will defend Moscow to the last drop of blood and isven ready to fight in the streets. Do not be upset, brothers, thathe law courts are closed; things have to be put in order, and we willeal with villains in our own way! When the time comes I shall wantoth town and peasant lads and will raise the cry a day or twoeforehand, but they are not wanted yet so I hold my peace. An ax wille useful, a hunting spear not bad, but a three-pronged fork will beest of all: a Frenchman is no heavier than a sheaf of rye. Tomorrowfter dinner I shall take the Iberian icon of the Mother of God to theounded in the Catherine Hospital where we will have some waterlessed. That will help them to get well quicker. I, too, am well now:ne of my eyes was sore but now I am on the lookout with both.
	"But military men have told me that it is impossible to fight in theown," said Pierre, "and that the position..."
	"Well, of course! That's what we were saying," replied the firstpeaker.
	"And what does he mean by 'One of my eyes was sore but now I am onhe lookout with both'?" asked Pierre.
	"The count had a sty," replied the adjutant smiling, "and was veryuch upset when I told him people had come to ask what was theatter with him. By the by, Count," he added suddenly, addressingierre with a smile, "we heard that you have family troubles andhat the countess, your wife..."
	"I have heard nothing," Pierre replied unconcernedly. "But what haveou heard?"
	"Oh, well, you know people often invent things. I only say what Ieard."
	"But what did you hear?"
	"Well, they say," continued the adjutant with the same smile,that the countess, your wife, is preparing to go abroad. I expectt's nonsense...."
	"Possibly," remarked Pierre, looking about him absent-mindedly. "Andho is that?" he asked, indicating a short old man in a clean blueeasant overcoat, with a big snow-white beard and eyebrows and a ruddyace.
	"He? That's a tradesman, that is to say, he's the restaurant keeper,ereshchagin. Perhaps you have heard of that affair with theroclamation."
	"Oh, so that is Vereshchagin!" said Pierre, looking at the firm,alm face of the old man and seeking any indication of his being araitor.
	"That's not he himself, that's the father of the fellow who wrotehe proclamation," said the adjutant. "The young man is in prisonnd I expect it will go hard with him."
	An old gentleman wearing a star and another official, a Germanearing a cross round his neck, approached the speaker.
	"It's a complicated story, you know," said the adjutant. "Thatroclamation appeared about two months ago. The count was informedf it. He gave orders to investigate the matter. Gabriel Ivanovichere made the inquiries. The proclamation had passed through exactlyixty-three hands. He asked one, 'From whom did you get it?' 'Fromo-and-so.' He went to the next one. 'From whom did you get it?' ando on till he reached Vereshchagin, a half educated tradesman, younow, 'a pet of a trader,'" said the adjutant smiling. "They askedim, 'Who gave it you?' And the point is that we knew whom he had itrom. He could only have had it from the Postmaster. But evidentlyhey had come to some understanding. He replied: 'From no one; Iade it up myself.' They threatened and questioned him, but he stucko that: 'I made it up myself.' And so it was reported to the count,ho sent for the man. 'From whom did you get the proclamation?' 'Irote it myself.' Well, you know the count," said the adjutantheerfully, with a smile of pride, "he flared up dreadfully- andust think of the fellow's audacity, lying, and obstinacy!"
	 "And the count wanted him to say it was from Klyucharev? Inderstand!" said Pierre.
	"Not at all," rejoined the adjutant in dismay. "Klyucharev had hiswn sins to answer for without that and that is why he has beenanished. But the point is that the count was much annoyed. 'How couldou have written it yourself?' said he, and he took up the Hamburgazette that was lying on the table. 'Here it is! You did not write itourself but translated it, and translated it abominably, becauseou don't even know French, you fool.' And what do you think? 'No,'aid he, 'I have not read any papers, I made it up myself.' 'If that'so, you're a traitor and I'll have you tried, and you'll be hanged!ay from whom you had it.' 'I have seen no papers, I made it upyself.' And that was the end of it. The count had the father fetched,ut the fellow stuck to it. He was sent for trial and condemned toard labor, I believe. Now the father has come to intercede for him.ut he's a good-for-nothing lad! You know that sort of tradesman'son, a dandy and lady-killer. He attended some lectures somewherend imagines that the devil is no match for him. That's the sort ofellow he is. His father keeps a cookshop here by the Stone Bridge,nd you know there was a large icon of God Almighty painted with acepter in one hand and an orb in the other. Well, he took that iconome with him for a few days and what did he do? He found somecoundrel of a painter..."BK11|CH11
	CHAPTER XI
	In the middle of this fresh tale Pierre was summoned to theommander in chief.
	When he entered the private room Count Rostopchin, puckering hisace, was rubbing his forehead and eyes with his hand. A short man wasaying something, but when Pierre entered he stopped speaking and wentut.
	"Ah, how do you do, great warrior?" said Rostopchin as soon as thehort man had left the room. "We have heard of your prowess. Buthat's not the point. Between ourselves, mon cher, do you belong tohe Masons?" he went on severely, as though there were something wrongbout it which he nevertheless intended to pardon. Pierre remainedilent. "I am well informed, my friend, but I am aware that therere Masons and Masons and I hope that you are not one of those whon pretense of saving mankind wish to ruin Russia."
	"Yes, I am a Mason," Pierre replied.
	"There, you see, mon cher! I expect you know that Messrs.peranski and Magnitski have been deported to their proper place.r. Klyucharev has been treated in the same way, and so have othersho on the plea of building up the temple of Solomon have tried toestroy the temple of their fatherland. You can understand thathere are reasons for this and that I could not have exiled theostmaster had he not been a harmful person. It has now come to mynowledge that you lent him your carriage for his removal from town,nd that you have even accepted papers from him for safe custody. Iike you and don't wish you any harm and- as you are only half my age- advise you, as a father would, to cease all communication with menf that stamp and to leave here as soon as possible."
	"But what did Klyucharev do wrong, Count?" asked Pierre.
	"That is for me to know, but not for you to ask," shoutedostopchin.
	"If he is accused of circulating Napoleon's proclamation it is notroved that he did so," said Pierre without looking at Rostopchin,and Vereshchagin..."
	"There we are!" Rostopchin shouted at Pierre louder than before,rowning suddenly. "Vereshchagin is a renegade and a traitor whoill be punished as he deserves," said he with the vindictive heatith which people speak when recalling an insult. "But I did notummon you to discuss my actions, but to give you advice- or anrder if you prefer it. I beg you to leave the town and break offll communication with such men as Klyucharev. And I will knock theonsense out of anybody"- but probably realizing that he washouting at Bezukhov who so far was not guilty of anything, hedded, taking Pierre's hand in a friendly manner, "We are on the evef a public disaster and I haven't time to be polite to everybodyho has business with me. My head is sometimes in a whirl. Well, monher, what are you doing personally?"
	"Why, nothing," answered Pierre without raising his eyes or changinghe thoughtful expression of his face.
	The count frowned.
	"A word of friendly advice, mon cher. Be off as soon as you can,hat's all I have to tell you. Happy he who has ears to hear. Good-by,y dear fellow. Oh, by the by!" he shouted through the doorway afterierre, "is it true that the countess has fallen into the clutchesf the holy fathers of the Society of Jesus?"
	Pierre did not answer and left Rostopchin's room more sullen andngry than he had ever before shown himself.
	When he reached home it was already getting dark. Some eighteople had come to see him that evening: the secretary of a committee,he colonel of his battalion, his steward, his major-domo, and variousetitioners. They all had business with Pierre and wanted decisionsrom him. Pierre did not understand and was not interested in any ofhese questions and only answered them in order to get rid of theseeople. When left alone at last he opened and read his wife's letter.
	"They, the soldiers at the battery, Prince Andrew killed... that oldan... Simplicity is submission to God. Suffering is necessary...he meaning of all... one must harness... my wife is gettingarried... One must forget and understand..." And going to his bede threw himself on it without undressing and immediately fell asleep.
	When he awoke next morning the major-domo came to inform him that special messenger, a police officer, had come from Countostopchin to know whether Count Bezukhov had left or was leavinghe town.
	A dozen persons who had business with Pierre were awaiting him inhe drawing room. Pierre dressed hurriedly and, instead of going toee them, went to the back porch and out through the gate.
	From that time till the end of the destruction of Moscow no one ofezukhov's household, despite all the search they made, saw Pierregain or knew where he was.BK11|CH12
	CHAPTER XII
	The Rostovs remained in Moscow till the first of September, that is,ill the eve of the enemy's entry into the city.
	After Petya had joined Obolenski's regiment of Cossacks and left forelaya Tserkov where that regiment was forming, the countess waseized with terror. The thought that both her sons were at the war,ad both gone from under her wing, that today or tomorrow either oroth of them might be killed like the three sons of one of hercquaintances, struck her that summer for the first time with cruellearness. She tried to get Nicholas back and wished to go herselfo join Petya, or to get him an appointment somewhere in Petersburg,ut neither of these proved possible. Petya could not return unlessis regiment did so or unless he was transferred to another regimentn active service. Nicholas was somewhere with the army and had notent a word since his last letter, in which he had given a detailedccount of his meeting with Princess Mary. The countess did notleep at night, or when she did fall asleep dreamed that she saw herons lying dead. After many consultations and conversations, the countt last devised means to tranquillize her. He got Petya transferredrom Obolenski's regiment to Bezukhov's, which was in training nearoscow. Though Petya would remain in the service, this transferould give the countess the consolation of seeing at least one ofer sons under her wing, and she hoped to arrange matters for heretya so as not to let him go again, but always get him appointed tolaces where he could not possibly take part in a battle. As long asicholas alone was in danger the countess imagined that she loveder first-born more than all her other children and even reproachederself for it; but when her youngest: the scapegrace who had been badt lessons, was always breaking things in the house and making himself nuisance to everybody, that snub-nosed Petya with his merry blackyes and fresh rosy cheeks where soft down was just beginning to show-hen he was thrown amid those big, dreadful, cruel men who wereighting somewhere about something and apparently finding pleasuren it- then his mother thought she loved him more, much more, than aller other children. The nearer the time came for Petya to return,he more uneasy grew the countess. She began to think she wouldever live to see such happiness. The presence of Sonya, of hereloved Natasha, or even of her husband irritated her. "What do I wantith them? I want no one but Petya," she thought.
	At the end of August the Rostovs received another letter fromicholas. He wrote from the province of Voronezh where he had beenent to procure remounts, but that letter did not set the countesst ease. Knowing that one son was out of danger she became the morenxious about Petya.
	Though by the twentieth of August nearly all the Rostovs'cquaintances had left Moscow, and though everybody tried toersuade the countess to get away as quickly as possible, she wouldot bear of leaving before her treasure, her adored Petya, returned.n the twenty-eighth of August he arrived. The passionate tendernessith which his mother received him did not please the sixteen-year-oldfficer. Though she concealed from him her intention of keeping himnder her wing, Petya guessed her designs, and instinctively fearinghat he might give way to emotion when with her- might "becomeomanish" as he termed it to himself- he treated her coldly, avoideder, and during his stay in Moscow attached himself exclusively toatasha for whom he had always had a particularly brotherlyenderness, almost lover-like.
	Owing to the count's customary carelessness nothing was ready forheir departure by the twenty-eighth of August and the carts that wereo come from their Ryazan and Moscow estates to remove their householdelongings did not arrive till the thirtieth.
	From the twenty-eighth till the thirty-first all Moscow was in austle and commotion. Every day thousands of men wounded at Borodinoere brought in by the Dorogomilov gate and taken to various partsf Moscow, and thousands of carts conveyed the inhabitants and theirossessions out by the other gates. In spite of Rostopchin'sroadsheets, or because of them or independently of them, thetrangest and most contradictory rumors were current in the town. Someaid that no one was to be allowed to leave the city, others on theontrary said that all the icons had been taken out of the churchesnd everybody was to be ordered to leave. Some said there had beennother battle after Borodino at which the French had been routed,hile others on the contrary reported that the Russian army bad beenestroyed. Some talked about the Moscow militia which, preceded by thelergy, would go to the Three Hills; others whispered that Augustinad been forbidden to leave, that traitors had been seized, that theeasants were rioting and robbing people on their way from Moscow, ando on. But all this was only talk; in reality (though the Council ofili, at which it was decided to abandon Moscow, had not yet beeneld) both those who went away and those who remained behind felt,hough they did not show it, that Moscow would certainly be abandoned,nd that they ought to get away as quickly as possible and saveheir belongings. It was felt that everything would suddenly breakp and change, but up to the first of September nothing had done so.s a criminal who is being led to execution knows that he must diemmediately, but yet looks about him and straightens the cap that iswry on his head, so Moscow involuntarily continued its wonted life,hough it knew that the time of its destruction was near when theonditions of life to which its people were accustomed to submit woulde completely upset.
	During the three days preceding the occupation of Moscow the wholeostov family was absorbed in various activities. The head of theamily, Count Ilya Rostov, continually drove about the city collectinghe current rumors from all sides and gave superficial and hastyrders at home about the preparations for their departure.
	The countess watched the things being packed, was dissatisfiedith everything, was constantly in pursuit of Petya who was alwaysunning away from her, and was jealous of Natasha with whom he spentll his time. Sonya alone directed the practical side of matters byetting things packed. But of late Sonya had been particularly sad andilent. Nicholas' letter in which he mentioned Princess Mary hadlicited, in her presence, joyous comments from the countess, whoaw an intervention of Providence in this meeting of the princessnd Nicholas.
	"I was never pleased at Bolkonski's engagement to Natasha," said theountess, "but I always wanted Nicholas to marry the princess, and had presentiment that it would happen. What a good thing it would be!"
	Sonya felt that this was true: that the only possibility ofetrieving the Rostovs' affairs was by Nicholas marrying a rich woman,nd that the princess was a good match. It was very bitter for her.ut despite her grief, or perhaps just because of it, she took onerself all the difficult work of directing the storing and packing ofheir things and was busy for whole days. The count and countessurned to her when they had any orders to give. Petya and Natasha onhe contrary, far from helping their parents, were generally auisance and a hindrance to everyone. Almost all day long the houseesounded with their running feet, their cries, and theirpontaneous laughter. They laughed and were gay not because thereas any reason to laugh, but because gaiety and mirth were in theirearts and so everything that happened was a cause for gaiety andaughter to them. Petya was in high spirits because having left home aoy he had returned (as everybody told him) a fine young man,ecause he was at home, because he had left Belaya Tserkov where thereas no hope of soon taking part in a battle and had come to Moscowhere there was to be fighting in a few days, and chiefly becauseatasha, whose lead he always followed, was in high spirits. Natashaas gay because she had been sad too long and now nothing reminded herf the cause of her sadness, and because she was feeling well. She waslso happy because she had someone to adore her: the adoration ofthers was a lubricant the wheels of her machine needed to make themun freely- and Petya adored her. Above all, they were gay becausehere was a war near Moscow, there would be fighting at the townates, arms were being given out, everybody was escaping- going awayomewhere, and in general something extraordinary was happening, andhat is always exciting, especially to the young.BK11|CH13
	CHAPTER XIII
	On Saturday, the thirty-first of August, everything in theostovs' house seemed topsy-turvy. All the doors were open, all theurniture was being carried out or moved about, and the mirrors andictures had been taken down. There were trunks in the rooms, and hay,rapping paper, and ropes were scattered about. The peasants and houseerfs carrying out the things were treading heavily on the parquetloors. The yard was crowded with peasant carts, some loaded highnd already corded up, others still empty.
	The voices and footsteps of the many servants and of the peasantsho had come with the carts resounded as they shouted to one anothern the yard and in the house. The count bad been out since morning.he countess had a headache brought on by all the noise and turmoilnd was lying down in the new sitting room with a vinegar compressn her head. Petya was not at home, he had gone to visit a friend withhom he meant to obtain a transfer from the militia to the activermy. Sonya was in the ballroom looking after the packing of the glassnd china. Natasha was sitting on the floor of her dismantled roomith dresses, ribbons, and scarves strewn all about her, gazingixedly at the floor and holding in her hands the old ball dressalready out of fashion) which she had worn at her first Petersburgall.
	Natasha was ashamed of doing nothing when everyone else was so busy,nd several times that morning had tried to set to work, but her heartas not in it, and she could not and did not know how to do anythingxcept with all her heart and all her might. For a while she had stoodeside Sonya while the china was being packed and tried to help, butoon gave it up and went to her room to pack her own things. Atirst she found it amusing to give away dresses and ribbons to theaids, but when that was done and what was left had still to beacked, she found it dull.
	"Dunyasha, you pack! You will, won't you, dear?" And when Dunyashaillingly promised to do it all for her, Natasha sat down on theloor, took her old ball dress, and fell into a reverie quitenrelated to what ought to have occupied her thoughts now. She wasoused from her reverie by the talk of the maids in the next roomwhich was theirs) and by the sound of their hurried footsteps goingo the back porch. Natasha got up and looked out of the window. Annormously long row of carts full of wounded men had stopped in thetreet.
	The housekeeper, the old nurse, the cooks, coachmen, maids, footmen,ostilions, and scullions stood at the gate, staring at the wounded.
	Natasha, throwing a clean pocket handkerchief over her hair andolding an end of it in each hand, went out into the street.
	The former housekeeper, old Mavra Kuzminichna, had stepped out ofhe crowd by the gate, gone up to a cart with a hood constructed ofast mats, and was speaking to a pale young officer who lay inside.atasha moved a few steps forward and stopped shyly, still holding herandkerchief, and listened to what the housekeeper was saying.
	"Then you have nobody in Moscow?" she was saying. "You would be moreomfortable somewhere in a house... in ours, for instance... theamily are leaving."
	"I don't know if it would be allowed," replied the officer in a weakoice. "Here is our commanding officer... ask him," and he pointedo a stout major who was walking back along the street past the row ofarts.
	Natasha glanced with frightened eyes at the face of the woundedfficer and at once went to meet the major.
	"May the wounded men stay in our house?" she asked.
	The major raised his hand to his cap with a smile.
	"Which one do you want, Ma'am'selle?" said he, screwing up hisyes and smiling.
	Natasha quietly repeated her question, and her face and whole mannerere so serious, though she was still holding the ends of herandkerchief, that the major ceased smiling and after some reflection-s if considering in how far the thing was possible- replied in theffirmative.
	"Oh yes, why not? They may," he said.
	With a slight inclination of her head, Natasha stepped backuickly to Mavra Kuzminichna, who stood talking compassionately to thefficer.
	"They may. He says they may!" whispered Natasha.
	The cart in which the officer lay was turned into the Rostovs' yard,nd dozens of carts with wounded men began at the invitation of theownsfolk to turn into the yards and to draw up at the entrances ofhe houses in Povarskaya Street. Natasha was evidently pleased to beealing with new people outside the ordinary routine of her life.he and Mavra Kuzminichna tried to get as many of the wounded asossible into their yard.
	"Your Papa must be told, though," said Mavra Kuzminichna.
	"Never mind, never mind, what does it matter? For one day we canove into the drawing room. They can have all our half of the house."
	"There now, young lady, you do take things into your head! Even ife put them into the wing, the men's room, or the nurse's room, weust ask permission."
	"Well, I'll ask."
	Natasha ran into the house and went on tiptoe through thealf-open door into the sitting room, where there was a smell ofinegar and Hoffman's drops.
	"Are you asleep, Mamma?"
	"Oh, what sleep-?" said the countess, waking up just as she wasropping into a doze.
	"Mamma darling!" said Natasha, kneeling by her mother and bringinger face close to her mother's, "I am sorry, forgive me, I'll never dot again; I woke you up! Mavra Kuzminichna has sent me: they haverought some wounded here- officers. Will you let them come? They haveowhere to go. I knew you'd let them come!" she said quickly all inne breath.
	"What officers? Whom have they brought? I don't understandnything about it," said the countess.
	Natasha laughed, and the countess too smiled slightly.
	"I knew you'd give permission... so I'll tell them," and, havingissed her mother, Natasha got up and went to the door.
	In the hall she met her father, who had returned with bad news.
	"We've stayed too long!" said the count with involuntary vexation.The Club is closed and the police are leaving."
	"Papa, is it all right- I've invited some of the wounded into theouse?" said Natasha.
	"Of course it is," he answered absently. "That's not the point. Ieg you not to indulge in trifles now, but to help to pack, andomorrow we must go, go, go!...."
	And the count gave a similar order to the major-domo and theervants.
	At dinner Petya having returned home told them the news he hadeard. He said the people had been getting arms in the Kremlin, andhat though Rostopchin's broadsheet had said that he would sound aall two or three days in advance, the order had certainly alreadyeen given for everyone to go armed to the Three Hills tomorrow, andhat there would be a big battle there.
	The countess looked with timid horror at her son's eager, excitedace as he said this. She realized that if she said a word about hisot going to the battle (she knew he enjoyed the thought of thempending engagement) he would say something about men, honor, and theatherland- something senseless, masculine, and obstinate whichhere would be no contradicting, and her plans would be spoiled; ando, hoping to arrange to leave before then and take Petya with hers their protector and defender, she did not answer him, but afterinner called the count aside and implored him with tears to takeer away quickly, that very night if possible. With a woman'snvoluntary loving cunning she, who till then had not shown any alarm,aid that she would die of fright if they did not leave that veryight. Without any pretense she was now afraid of everything.BK11|CH14
	CHAPTER XIV
	Madame Schoss, who had been out to visit her daughter, increased theountess' fears still more by telling what she had seen at a spiritealer's in Myasnitski Street. When returning by that street she hadeen unable to pass because of a drunken crowd rioting in front of thehop. She had taken a cab and driven home by a side street and theabman had told her that the people were breaking open the barrelst the drink store, having received orders to do so.
	After dinner the whole Rostov household set to work withnthusiastic haste packing their belongings and preparing for theireparture. The old count, suddenly setting to work, kept passingrom the yard to the house and back again, shouting confusednstructions to the hurrying people, and flurrying them still more.etya directed things in the yard. Sonya, owing to the count'sontradictory orders, lost her head and did not know what to do. Theervants ran noisily about the house and yard, shouting and disputing.atasha, with the ardor characteristic of all she did suddenly seto work too. At first her intervention in the business of packingas received skeptically. Everybody expected some prank from her andid not wish to obey her; but she resolutely and passionately demandedbedience, grew angry and nearly cried because they did not heeder, and at last succeeded in making them believe her. Her firstxploit, which cost her immense effort and established heruthority, was the packing of the carpets. The count had valuableobelin tapestries and Persian carpets in the house. When Natashaet to work two cases were standing open in the ballroom, one almostull up with crockery, the other with carpets. There was also muchhina standing on the tables, and still more was being brought in fromhe storeroom. A third case was needed and servants had gone toetch it.
	"Sonya, wait a bit- we'll pack everything into these," said Natasha.
	"You can't, Miss, we have tried to," said the butler's assistant.
	"No, wait a minute, please."
	And Natasha began rapidly taking out of the case dishes and platesrapped in paper.
	"The dishes must go in here among the carpets," said she.
	"Why, it's a mercy if we can get the carpets alone into threeases," said the butler's assistant.
	"Oh, wait, please!" And Natasha began rapidly and deftly sorting outhe things. "These aren't needed," said she, putting aside some platesf Kiev ware. "These- yes, these must go among the carpets," she said,eferring to the Saxony china dishes.
	"Don't, Natasha! Leave it alone! We'll get it all packed," urgedonya reproachfully.
	"What a young lady she is!" remarked the major-domo.
	But Natasha would not give in. She turned everything out and beganuickly repacking, deciding that the inferior Russian carpets andnnecessary crockery should not be taken at all. When everything hadeen taken out of the cases, they recommenced packing, and it turnedut that when the cheaper things not worth taking had nearly alleen rejected, the valuable ones really did all go into the two cases.nly the lid of the case containing the carpets would not shut down. Aew more things might have been taken out, but Natasha insisted onaving her own way. She packed, repacked, pressed, made the butler'sssistant and Petya- whom she had drawn into the business ofacking- press on the lid, and made desperate efforts herself.
	"That's enough, Natasha," said Sonya. "I see you were right, butust take out the top one."
	"I won't!" cried Natasha, with one hand bolding back the hair thatung over her perspiring face, while with the other she pressed downhe carpets. "Now press, Petya! Press, Vasilich, press hard!" sheried.
	The carpets yielded and the lid closed; Natasha, clapping her hands,creamed with delight and tears fell from her eyes. But this onlyasted a moment. She at once set to work afresh and they now trusteder completely. The count was not angry even when they told him thatatasha had countermanded an order of his, and the servants now cameo her to ask whether a cart was sufficiently loaded, and whether itight be corded up. Thanks to Natasha's directions the work now wentn expeditiously, unnecessary things were left, and the mostaluable packed as compactly as possible.
	But hard as they all worked till quite late that night, they couldot get everything packed. The countess had fallen asleep and theount, having put off their departure till next morning, went to bed.
	Sonya and Natasha slept in the sitting room without undressing.
	That night another wounded man was driven down the Povarskaya, andavra Kuzminichna, who was standing at the gate, had him broughtnto the Rostovs' yard. Mavra Kuzminichna concluded that he was a verymportant man. He was being conveyed in a caleche with a raisedood, and was quite covered by an apron. On the box beside theriver sat a venerable old attendant. A doctor and two soldiersollowed the carriage in a cart.
	"Please come in here. The masters are going away and the whole houseill be empty," said the old woman to the old attendant.
	"Well, perhaps," said he with a sigh. "We don't expect to get himome alive! We have a house of our own in Moscow, but it's a longay from here, and there's nobody living in it."
	"Do us the honor to come in, there's plenty of everything in theaster's house. Come in," said Mavra Kuzminichna. "Is he very ill?"he asked.
	The attendant made a hopeless gesture.
	"We don't expect to get him home! We must ask the doctor."
	And the old servant got down from the box and went up to the cart.
	"All right!" said the doctor.
	The old servant returned to the caleche, looked into it, shook hisead disconsolately, told the driver to turn into the yard, andtopped beside Mavra Kuzminichna.
	"O, Lord Jesus Christ!" she murmured.
	She invited them to take the wounded man into the house.
	"The masters won't object..." she said.
	But they had to avoid carrying the man upstairs, and so they tookim into the wing and put him in the room that had been Madamechoss'.
	This wounded man was Prince Andrew Bolkonski.BK11|CH15
	CHAPTER XV
	Moscow's last day had come. It was a clear bright autumn day, aunday. The church bells everywhere were ringing for service, justs usual on Sundays. Nobody seemed yet to realize what awaited theity.
	Only two things indicated the social condition of Moscow- theabble, that is the poor people, and the price of commodities. Annormous crowd of factory hands, house serfs, and peasants, withhom some officials, seminarists, and gentry were mingled, had gonearly that morning to the Three Hills. Having waited there forostopchin who did not turn up, they became convinced that Moscowould be surrendered, and then dispersed all about the town to theublic houses and cookshops. Prices too that day indicated the statef affairs. The price of weapons, of gold, of carts and horses, keptising, but the value of paper money and city articles kept falling,o that by midday there were instances of carters removing valuableoods, such as cloth, and receiving in payment a half of what theyarted, while peasant horses were fetching five hundred rubles each,nd furniture, mirrors, and bronzes were being given away for nothing.
	In the Rostovs' staid old-fashioned house the dissolution oformer conditions of life was but little noticeable. As to the serfshe only indication was that three out of their huge retinueisappeared during the night, but nothing was stolen; and as to thealue of their possessions, the thirty peasant carts that had comen from their estates and which many people envied proved to bextremely valuable and they were offered enormous sums of money forhem. Not only were huge sums offered for the horses and carts, but onhe previous evening and early in the morning of the first ofeptember, orderlies and servants sent by wounded officers came to theostovs' and wounded men dragged themselves there from the Rostovs'nd from neighboring houses where they were accommodated, entreatinghe servants to try to get them a lift out of Moscow. The major-domoo whom these entreaties were addressed, though he was sorry for theounded, resolutely refused, saying that he dare not even mentionhe matter to the count. Pity these wounded men as one might, it wasvident that if they were given one cart there would be no reason toefuse another, or all the carts and one's own carriages as well.hirty carts could not save all the wounded and in the generalatastrophe one could not disregard oneself and one's own family. Sohought the major-domo on his master's behalf.
	On waking up that morning Count Ilya Rostov left his bedroom softly,o as not to wake the countess who had fallen asleep only towardorning, and came out to the porch in his lilac silk dressing gown. Inhe yard stood the carts ready corded. The carriages were at the frontorch. The major-domo stood at the porch talking to an elderly orderlynd to a pale young officer with a bandaged arm. On seeing the counthe major-domo made a significant and stern gesture to them both to goway.
	"Well, Vasilich, is everything ready?" asked the count, and strokingis bald head he looked good-naturedly at the officer and therderly and nodded to them. (He liked to see new faces.)
	"We can harness at once, your excellency."
	"Well, that's right. As soon as the countess wakes we'll be off, Godilling! What is it, gentlemen?" he added, turning to the officer.Are you staying in my house?"
	The officer came nearer and suddenly his face flushed crimson.
	"Count, be so good as to allow me... for God's sake, to get intoome corner of one of your carts! I have nothing here with me.... Ihall be all right on a loaded cart..."
	Before the officer had finished speaking the orderly made the sameequest on behalf of his master.
	"Oh, yes, yes,yes!" said the count hastily. "I shall be veryleased, very pleased. Vasilich, you'll see to it. Just unload oner two carts. Well, what of it... do what's necessary..." said theount, muttering some indefinite order.
	But at the same moment an expression of warm gratitude on thefficer's face had already sealed the order. The count looked aroundim. In the yard, at the gates, at the window of the wings, woundedfficers and their orderlies were to be seen. They were all looking athe count and moving toward the porch.
	"Please step into the gallery, your excellency," said theajor-domo. "What are your orders about the pictures?"
	The count went into the house with him, repeating his order not toefuse the wounded who asked for a lift.
	"Well, never mind, some of the things can be unloaded," he addedn a soft, confidential voice, as though afraid of being overheard.
	At nine o'clock the countess woke up, and Matrena Timofeevna, whoad been her lady's maid before her marriage and now performed aort of chief gendarme's duty for her, came to say that Madamechoss was much offended and the young ladies' summer dresses couldot be left behind. On inquiry, the countess learned that Madamechoss was offended because her trunk had been taken down from itsart, and all the loads were being uncorded and the luggage takenut of the carts to make room for wounded men whom the count in theimplicity of his heart had ordered that they should take with them.he countess sent for her husband.
	"What is this, my dear? I hear that the luggage is being unloaded."
	"You know, love, I wanted to tell you... Countess dear... an officerame to me to ask for a few carts for the wounded. After all, ours arehings that can be bought but think what being left behind means tohem!... Really now, in our own yard- we asked them in ourselves andhere are officers among them.... You know, I think, my dear... lethem be taken... where's the hurry?"
	The count spoke timidly, as he always did when talking of moneyatters. The countess was accustomed to this tone as a precursor ofews of something detrimental to the children's interests, such as theuilding of a new gallery or conservatory, the inauguration of arivate theater or an orchestra. She was accustomed always to opposenything announced in that timid tone and considered it her duty to doo.
	She assumed her dolefully submissive manner and said to her husband:Listen to me, Count, you have managed matters so that we areetting nothing for the house, and now you wish to throw away all our-ll the children's property! You said yourself that we have aundred thousand rubles' worth of things in the house. I don'tonsent, my dear, I don't! Do as you please! It's the government'susiness to look after the wounded; they know that. Look at theopukhins opposite, they cleared out everything two days ago. That'shat other people do. It's only we who are such fools. If you haveo pity on me, have some for the children."
	Flourishing his arms in despair the count left the room withouteplying.
	"Papa, what are you doing that for?" asked Natasha, who had followedim into her mother's room.
	"Nothing! What business is it of yours?" muttered the count angrily.
	"But I heard," said Natasha. "Why does Mamma object?"
	"What business is it of yours?" cried the count.
	Natasha stepped up to the window and pondered.
	"Papa! Here's Berg coming to see us," said she, looking out of theindow.BK11|CH16
	CHAPTER XVI
	Berg, the Rostovs' son-in-law, was already a colonel wearing therders of Vladimir and Anna, and he still filled the quiet andgreeable post of assistant to the head of the staff of thessistant commander of the first division of the Second Army.
	On the first of September he had come to Moscow from the army.
	He had nothing to do in Moscow, but he had noticed that everyonen the army was asking for leave to visit Moscow and had somethingo do there. So he considered it necessary to ask for leave of absenceor family and domestic reasons.
	Berg drove up to his father-in-law's house in his spruce little trapith a pair of sleek roans, exactly like those of a certain prince. Heooked attentively at the carts in the yard and while going up tohe porch took out a clean pocket handkerchief and tied a knot in it.
	From the anteroom Berg ran with smooth though impatient steps intohe drawing room, where he embraced the count, kissed the hands ofatasha and Sonya, and hastened to inquire after "Mamma's" health.
	"Health, at a time like this?" said the count. "Come, tell us theews! Is the army retreating or will there be another battle?"
	"God Almighty alone can decide the fate of our fatherland, Papa,"aid Berg. "The army is burning with a spirit of heroism and theeaders, so to say, have now assembled in council. No one knows whats coming. But in general I can tell you, Papa, that such a heroicpirit, the truly antique valor of the Russian army, which they- whicht" (he corrected himself) "has shown or displayed in the battle ofhe twenty-sixth- there are no words worthy to do it justice! I tellou, Papa" (he smote himself on the breast as a general he had heardpeaking had done, but Berg did it a trifle late for he should havetruck his breast at the words "Russian army"), "I tell you franklyhat we, the commanders, far from having to urge the men on ornything of that kind, could hardly restrain those... those... yes,hose exploits of antique valor," he went on rapidly. "General Barclaye Tolly risked his life everywhere at the head of the troops, I canssure you. Our corps was stationed on a hillside. You can imagine!"
	And Berg related all that he remembered of the various tales head heard those days. Natasha watched him with an intent gaze thatonfused him, as if she were trying to find in his face the answero some question.
	"Altogether such heroism as was displayed by the Russian warriorsannot be imagined or adequately praised!" said Berg, glancing roundt Natasha, and as if anxious to conciliate her, replying to herntent look with a smile. "'Russia is not in Moscow, she lives inhe hearts of her sons!' Isn't it so, Papa?" said he.
	Just then the countess came in from the sitting room with a wearynd dissatisfied expression. Berg hurriedly jumped up, kissed herand, asked about her health, and, swaying his head from side toide to express sympathy, remained standing beside her.
	"Yes, Mamma, I tell you sincerely that these are hard and sadimes for every Russian. But why are you so anxious? You have stillime to get away...."
	"I can't think what the servants are about," said the countess,urning to her husband. "I have just been told that nothing is readyet. Somebody after all must see to things. One misses Mitenka at suchimes. There won't be any end to it."
	The count was about to say something, but evidently restrainedimself. He got up from his chair and went to the door.
	At that moment Berg drew out his handkerchief as if to blow his nosend, seeing the knot in it, pondered, shaking his head sadly andignificantly.
	"And I have a great favor to ask of you, Papa," said he.
	"Hm..." said the count, and stopped.
	"I was driving past Yusupov's house just now," said Berg with aaugh, "when the steward, a man I know, ran out and asked me whether Iouldn't buy something. I went in out of curiosity, you know, andhere is a small chiffonier and a dressing table. You know how dearera wanted a chiffonier like that and how we had a dispute about it."At the mention of the chiffonier and dressing table Bergnvoluntarily changed his tone to one of pleasure at his admirableomestic arrangements.) "And it's such a beauty! It pulls out andas a secret English drawer, you know! And dear Vera has long wantedne. I wish to give her a surprise, you see. I saw so many of thoseeasant carts in your yard. Please let me have one, I will pay the manell, and..."
	The count frowned and coughed.
	"Ask the countess, I don't give orders."
	"If it's inconvenient, please don't," said Berg. "Only I so wantedt, for dear Vera's sake."
	"Oh, go to the devil, all of you! To the devil, the devil, theevil..." cried the old count. "My head's in a whirl!"
	And he left the room. The countess began to cry.
	"Yes, Mamma! Yes, these are very hard times!" said Berg.
	Natasha left the room with her father and, as if finding itifficult to reach some decision, first followed him and then ranownstairs.
	Petya was in the porch, engaged in giving out weapons to theervants who were to leave Moscow. The loaded carts were stilltanding in the yard. Two of them had been uncorded and a woundedfficer was climbing into one of them helped by an orderly.
	"Do you know what it's about?" Petya asked Natasha.
	She understood that he meant what were their parents quarrelingbout. She did not answer.
	"It's because Papa wanted to give up all the carts to theounded," said Petya. "Vasilich told me. I consider..."
	"I consider," Natasha suddenly almost shouted, turning her angryace to Petya, "I consider it so horrid, so abominable, so... Ion't know what. Are we despicable Germans?"
	Her throat quivered with convulsive sobs and, afraid of weakeningnd letting the force of her anger run to waste, she turned and rushedeadlong up the stairs.
	Berg was sitting beside the countess consoling her with theespectful attention of a relative. The count, pipe in hand, wasacing up and down the room, when Natasha, her face distorted bynger, burst in like a tempest and approached her mother with rapidteps.
	"It's horrid! It's abominable! she screamed. "You can't possiblyave ordered it!"
	Berg and the countess looked at her, perplexed and frightened. Theount stood still at the window and listened.
	"Mamma, it's impossible: see what is going on in the yard!" sheried. "They will be left!..."
	"What's the matter with you? Who are 'they'? What do you want?"
	"Why, the wounded! It's impossible, Mamma. It's monstrous!... No,amma darling, it's not the thing. Please forgive me, darling....amma, what does it matter what we take away? Only look what isoing on in the yard... Mamma!... It's impossible!"
	The count stood by the window and listened without turning round.uddenly he sniffed and put his face closer to the window.
	The countess glanced at her daughter, saw her face full of shame forer mother, saw her agitation, and understood why her husband didot turn to look at her now, and she glanced round quite disconcerted.
	"Oh, do as you like! Am I hindering anyone?" she said, noturrendering at once.
	"Mamma, darling, forgive me!"
	But the countess pushed her daughter away and went up to herusband.
	"My dear, you order what is right.... You know I don't understandbout it," said she, dropping her eyes shamefacedly.
	"The eggs... the eggs are teaching the hen," muttered the counthrough tears of joy, and he embraced his wife who was glad to hideer look of shame on his breast.
	"Papa! Mamma! May I see to it? May I?..." asked Natasha. "We willtill take all the most necessary things."
	The count nodded affirmatively, and Natasha, at the rapid pace athich she used to run when playing at tag, ran through the ballroom tohe anteroom and downstairs into the yard.
	The servants gathered round Natasha, but could not believe thetrange order she brought them until the count himself, in hisife's name, confirmed the order to give up all the carts to theounded and take the trunks to the storerooms. When they understoodhat order the servants set to work at this new task with pleasure andeal. It no longer seemed strange to them but on the contrary iteemed the only thing that could be done, just as a quarter of an hourefore it had not seemed strange to anyone that the wounded shoulde left behind and the goods carted away but that had seemed thenly thing to do.
	The whole household, as if to atone for not having done it sooner,et eagerly to work at the new task of placing the wounded in thearts. The wounded dragged themselves out of their rooms and stoodith pale but happy faces round the carts. The news that carts were toe had spread to the neighboring houses, from which wounded menegan to come into the Rostovs' yard. Many of the wounded asked themot to unload the carts but only to let them sit on the top of thehings. But the work of unloading, once started, could not berrested. It seemed not to matter whether all or only half thehings were left behind. Cases full of china, bronzes, pictures, andirrors that had been so carefully packed the night before now laybout the yard, and still they went on searching for and findingossibilities of unloading this or that and letting the wounded havenother and yet another cart.
	"We can take four more men," said the steward. "They can have myrap, or else what is to become of them?"
	"Let them have my wardrobe cart," said the countess. "Dunyasha cano with me in the carriage."
	They unloaded the wardrobe cart and sent it to take wounded men from house two doors off. The whole household, servants included, wasright and animated. Natasha was in a state of rapturous excitementuch as she had not known for a long time.
	"What could we fasten this onto?" asked the servants, trying toix a trunk on the narrow footboard behind a carriage. "We must keept least one cart."
	"What's in it?" asked Natasha.
	"The count's books."
	"Leave it, Vasilich will put it away. It's not wanted."
	The phaeton was full of people and there was a doubt as to whereount Peter could sit.
	"On the box. You'll sit on the box, won't you, Petya?" criedatasha.
	Sonya too was busy all this time, but the aim of her efforts wasuite different from Natasha's. She was putting away the things thatad to be left behind and making a list of them as the countessished, and she tried to get as much taken away with them as possible.BK11|CH17
	CHAPTER XVII
	Before two o'clock in the afternoon the Rostovs' four carriages,acked full and with the horses harnessed, stood at the front door.ne by one the carts with the wounded had moved out of the yard.
	The caleche in which Prince Andrew was being taken attracted Sonya'sttention as it passed the front porch. With the help of a maid sheas arranging a seat for the countess in the huge high coach thattood at the entrance.
	"Whose caleche is that?" she inquired, leaning out of the carriageindow.
	"Why, didn't you know, Miss?" replied the maid. "The wounded prince:e spent the night in our house and is going with us."
	"But who is it? What's his name?"
	"It's our intended that was- Prince Bolkonski himself! They say hes dying," replied the maid with a sigh.
	Sonya jumped out of the coach and ran to the countess. The countess,ired out and already dressed in shawl and bonnet for her journey, wasacing up and down the drawing room, waiting for the household tossemble for the usual silent prayer with closed doors beforetarting. Natasha was not in the room.
	"Mamma," said Sonya, "Prince Andrew is here, mortally wounded. He isoing with us."
	The countess opened her eyes in dismay and, seizing Sonya's arm,lanced around.
	"Natasha?" she murmured.
	At that moment this news had only one significance for both of them.hey knew their Natasha, and alarm as to what would happen if sheeard this news stifled all sympathy for the man they both liked.
	"Natasha does not know yet, but he is going with us," said Sonya.
	"You say he is dying?"
	Sonya nodded.
	The countess put her arms around Sonya and began to cry.
	"The ways of God are past finding out!" she thought, feeling thathe Almighty Hand, hitherto unseen, was becoming manifest in allhat was now taking place.
	"Well, Mamma? Everything is ready. What's the matter?" askedatasha, as with animated face she ran into the room.
	"Nothing," answered the countess. "If everything is ready let ustart."
	And the countess bent over her reticule to hide her agitated face.onya embraced Natasha and kissed her.
	Natasha looked at her inquiringly.
	"What is it? What has happened?"
	"Nothing... No..."
	"Is it something very bad for me? What is it?" persisted Natashaith her quick intuition.
	Sonya sighed and made no reply. The count, Petya, Madame Schoss,avra Kuzminichna, and Vasilich came into the drawing room and, havinglosed the doors, they all sat down and remained for some momentsilently seated without looking at one another.
	The count was the first to rise, and with a loud sigh crossedimself before the icon. All the others did the same. Then the countmbraced Mavra Kuzminichna and Vasilich, who were to remain in Moscow,nd while they caught at his hand and kissed his shoulder he pattedheir backs lightly with some vaguely affectionate and comfortingords. The countess went into the oratory and there Sonya found her oner knees before the icons that had been left here and there hangingn the wall. (The most precious ones, with which some family traditionas connected, were being taken with them.)
	In the porch and in the yard the men whom Petya had armed withwords and daggers, with trousers tucked inside their high boots andith belts and girdles tightened, were taking leave of those remainingehind.
	As is always the case at a departure, much had been forgotten or putn the wrong place, and for a long time two menservants stood one onach side of the open door and the carriage steps waiting to helphe countess in, while maids rushed with cushions and bundles from theouse to the carriages, the caleche, the phaeton, and back again.
	"They always will forget everything!" said the countess. "Don'tou know I can't sit like that?"
	And Dunyasha, with clenched teeth, without replying but with anggrieved look on her face, hastily got into the coach to rearrangehe seat.
	"Oh, those servants!" said the count, swaying his head.
	Efim, the old coachman, who was the only one the countess trusted torive her, sat perched up high on the box and did not so much aslance round at what was going on behind him. From thirty years'xperience he knew it would be some time yet before the order, "Beff, in God's name!" would be given him: and he knew that even when itas said he would be stopped once or twice more while they sent backo fetch something that had been forgotten, and even after that heould again be stopped and the countess herself would lean out ofhe window and beg him for the love of heaven to drive carefullyown the hill. He knew all this and therefore waited calmly for whatould happen, with more patience than the horses, especially theear one, the chestnut Falcon, who was pawing the ground andhamping his bit. At last all were seated, the carriage steps wereolded and pulled up, the door was shut, somebody was sent for araveling case, and the countess leaned out and said what she had toay. Then Efim deliberately doffed his hat and began crossing himself.he postilion and all the other servants did the same. "Off, inod's name!" said Efim, putting on his hat. "Start!" The postiliontarted the horses, the off pole horse tugged at his collar, theigh springs creaked, and the body of the coach swayed. The footmanprang onto the box of the moving coach which jolted as it passedut of the yard onto the uneven roadway; the other vehicles joltedn their turn, and the procession of carriages moved up the street. Inhe carriages, the caleche, and the phaeton, all crossed themselves ashey passed the church opposite the house. Those who were to remain inoscow walked on either side of the vehicles seeing the travelers off.
	Rarely had Natasha experienced so joyful a feeling as now, sittingn the carriage beside the countess and gazing at the slowlyeceding walls of forsaken, agitated Moscow. Occasionally she leanedut of the carriage window and looked back and then forward at theong train of wounded in front of them. Almost at the head of the linehe could see the raised hood of Prince Andrew's caleche. She didot know who was in it, but each time she looked at the procession heryes sought that caleche. She knew it was right in front.
	In Kudrino, from the Nikitski, Presnya, and Podnovinsk Streetsame several other trains of vehicles similar to the Rostovs', ands they passed along the Sadovaya Street the carriages and cartsormed two rows abreast.
	As they were going round the Sukharev water tower Natasha, who wasnquisitively and alertly scrutinizing the people driving or walkingast, suddenly cried out in joyful surprise:
	"Dear me! Mamma, Sonya, look, it's he!"
	"Who? Who?"
	"Look! Yes, on my word, it's Bezukhov!" said Natasha, putting heread out of the carriage and staring at a tall, stout man in aoachman's long coat, who from his manner of walking and moving wasvidently a gentleman in disguise, and who was passing under therch of the Sukharev tower accompanied by a small, sallow-faced,eardless old man in a frieze coat.
	"Yes, it really is Bezukhov in a coachman's coat, with aueer-looking old boy. Really," said Natasha, "look, look!"
	"No, it's not he. How can you talk such nonsense?"
	"Mamma," screamed Natasha, "I'll stake my head it's he! I assureou! Stop, stop!" she cried to the coachman.
	But the coachman could not stop, for from the Meshchanski Streetame more carts and carriages, and the Rostovs were being shouted ato move on and not block the way.
	In fact, however, though now much farther off than before, theostovs all saw Pierre- or someone extraordinarily like him- in aoachman's coat, going down the street with head bent and a seriousace beside a small, beardless old man who looked like a footman. Thatld man noticed a face thrust out of the carriage window gazing athem, and respectfully touching Pierre's elbow said something to himnd pointed to the carriage. Pierre, evidently engrossed in thought,ould not at first understand him. At length when he had understoodnd looked in the direction the old man indicated, he recognizedatasha, and following his first impulse stepped instantly and rapidlyoward the coach. But having taken a dozen steps he seemed to rememberomething and stopped.
	Natasha's face, leaning out of the window, beamed with quizzicalindliness.
	"Peter Kirilovich, come here! We have recognized you! This isonderful!" she cried, holding out her hand to him. "What are youoing? Why are you like this?"
	Pierre took her outstretched hand and kissed it awkwardly as healked along beside her while the coach still moved on.
	"What is the matter, Count?" asked the countess in a surprised andommiserating tone.
	"What? What? Why? Don't ask me," said Pierre, and looked round atatasha whose radiant, happy expression- of which he was consciousithout looking at her- filled him with enchantment.
	"Are you remaining in Moscow, then?"
	Pierre hesitated.
	"In Moscow?" he said in a questioning tone. "Yes, in Moscow.oodby!"
	"Ah, if only I were a man? I'd certainly stay with you. Howplendid!" said Natasha. "Mamma, if you'll let me, I'll stay!"
	Pierre glanced absently at Natasha and was about to say something,ut the countess interrupted him.
	"You were at the battle, we heard."
	"Yes, I was," Pierre answered. "There will be another battleomorrow..." he began, but Natasha interrupted him.
	"But what is the matter with you, Count? You are not likeourself...."
	"Oh, don't ask me, don't ask me! I don't know myself. Tomorrow...ut no! Good-by, good-by!" he muttered. "It's an awful time!" andropping behind the carriage he stepped onto the pavement.
	Natasha continued to lean out of the window for a long time, beamingt him with her kindly, slightly quizzical, happy smile.BK11|CH18
	CHAPTER XVIII
	For the last two days, ever since leaving home, Pierre had beeniving in the empty house of his deceased benefactor, Bazdeev. This isow it happened.
	When he woke up on the morning after his return to Moscow and hisnterview with Count Rostopchin, he could not for some time make outhere he was and what was expected of him. When he was informed thatmong others awaiting him in his reception room there was arenchman who had brought a letter from his wife, the Countess Helene,e felt suddenly overcome by that sense of confusion andopelessness to which he was apt to succumb. He felt that everythingas now at an end, all was in confusion and crumbling to pieces,hat nobody was right or wrong, the future held nothing, and there waso escape from this position. Smiling unnaturally and muttering toimself, he first sat down on the sofa in an attitude of despair, thenose, went to the door of the reception room and peeped through therack, returned flourishing his arms, and took up a book. Hisajor-domo came in a second time to say that the Frenchman who hadrought the letter from the countess was very anxious to see him ifnly for a minute, and that someone from Bazdeev's widow had called tosk Pierre to take charge of her husband's books, as she herself waseaving for the country.
	"Oh, yes, in a minute; wait... or no! No, of course... go and say will come directly," Pierre replied to the major-domo.
	But as soon as the man had left the room Pierre took up his hathich was lying on the table and went out of his study by the otheroor. There was no one in the passage. He went along the wholeength of this passage to the stairs and, frowning and rubbing hisorehead with both hands, went down as far as the first landing. Theall porter was standing at the front door. From the landing whereierre stood there was a second staircase leading to the backntrance. He went down that staircase and out into the yard. No onead seen him. But there were some carriages waiting, and as soon asierre stepped out of the gate the coachmen and the yard porteroticed him and raised their caps to him. When he felt he was beingooked at he behaved like an ostrich which hides its head in a bush inrder not to be seen: he hung his head and quickening his pace wentown the street.
	Of all the affairs awaiting Pierre that day the sorting of Josephazdeev's books and papers appeared to him the most necessary.
	He hired the first cab he met and told the driver to go to theatriarch's Ponds, where the widow Bazdeev's house was.
	Continually turning round to look at the rows of loaded carts thatere making their way from all sides out of Moscow, and balancingis bulky body so as not to slip out of the ramshackle old vehicle,ierre, experiencing the joyful feeling of a boy escaping from school,egan to talk to his driver.
	The man told him that arms were being distributed today at theremlin and that tomorrow everyone would be sent out beyond thehree Hills gates and a great battle would be fought there.
	Having reached the Patriarch's Ponds Pierre found the Bazdeevs'ouse, where he had not been for a long time past. He went up to theate. Gerasim, that sallow beardless old man Pierre had seen atorzhok five years before with Joseph Bazdeev, came out in answer tois knock.
	"At home?" asked Pierre.
	"Owing to the present state of things Sophia Danilovna has gone tohe Torzhok estate with the children, your excellency."
	"I will come in all the same, I have to look through the books,"aid Pierre.
	"Be so good as to step in. Makar Alexeevich, the brother of myate master- may the kingdom of heaven be his- has remained here,ut he is in a weak state as you know," said the old servant.
	Pierre knew that Makar Alexeevich was Joseph Bazdeev's half-insanerother and a hard drinker.
	"Yes, yes, I know. Let us go in..." said Pierre and entered theouse.
	A tall, bald-headed old man with a red nose, wearing a dressing gownnd with galoshes on his bare feet, stood in the anteroom. On seeingierre he muttered something angrily and went away along the passage.
	"He was a very clever man but has now grown quite feeble, as youronor sees," said Gerasim. "Will you step into the study?" Pierreodded. "As it was sealed up so it has remained, but Sophiaanilovna gave orders that if anyone should come from you they were toave the books."
	Pierre went into that gloomy study which he had entered with suchrepidation in his benefactor's lifetime. The room, dusty andntouched since the death of Joseph Bazdeev was now even gloomier.
	Gerasim opened one of the shutters and left the room on tiptoe.ierre went round the study, approached the cupboard in which theanuscripts were kept, and took out what had once been one of the mostmportant, the holy of holies of the order. This was the authenticcotch Acts with Bazdeev's notes and explanations. He sat down athe dusty writing table, and, having laid the manuscripts beforeim, opened them out, closed them, finally pushed them away, andesting his head on his hand sank into meditation.
	Gerasim looked cautiously into the study several times and sawierre always sitting in the same attitude.
	More than two hours passed and Gerasim took the liberty of making slight noise at the door to attract his attention, but Pierre didot hear him.
	"Is the cabman to be discharged, your honor?"
	"Oh yes!" said Pierre, rousing himself and rising hurriedly. "Lookere," he added, taking Gerasim by a button of his coat and lookingown at the old man with moist, shining, and ecstatic eyes, "I say, doou know that there is going to be a battle tomorrow?"
	"We heard so," replied the man.
	"I beg you not to tell anyone who I am, and to do what I ask you."
	"Yes, your excellency," replied Gerasim. "Will you have something toat?"
	"No, but I want something else. I want peasant clothes and aistol," said Pierre, unexpectedly blushing.
	"Yes, your excellency," said Gerasim after thinking for a moment.
	All the rest of that day Pierre spent alone in his benefactor'study, and Gerasim heard him pacing restlessly from one corner tonother and talking to himself. And he spent the night on a bed madep for him there.
	Gerasim, being a servant who in his time had seen many strangehings, accepted Pierre's taking up his residence in the house withouturprise, and seemed pleased to have someone to wait on. That samevening- without even asking himself what they were wanted for- herocured a coachman's coat and cap for Pierre, and promised to get himhe pistol next day. Makar Alexeevich came twice that eveninghuffling along in his galoshes as far as the door and stopped andooked ingratiatingly at Pierre. But as soon as Pierre turned towardim he wrapped his dressing gown around him with a shamefaced andngry look and hurried away. It was when Pierre (wearing theoachman's coat which Gerasim had procured for him and had disinfectedy steam) was on his way with the old man to buy the pistol at theukharev market that he met the Rostovs.BK11|CH19
	CHAPTER XIX
	Kutuzov's order to retreat through Moscow to the Ryazan road wasssued at night on the first of September.
	The first troops started at once, and during the night theyarched slowly and steadily without hurry. At daybreak, however, thoseearing the town at the Dorogomilov bridge saw ahead of them masses ofoldiers crowding and hurrying across the bridge, ascending on thepposite side and blocking the streets and alleys, while endlessasses of troops were bearing down on them from behind, and annreasoning hurry and alarm overcame them. They all rushed forwardo the bridge, onto it, and to the fords and the boats. Kutuzovimself had driven round by side streets to the other side of Moscow.
	By ten o'clock in the morning of the second of September, only theear guard remained in the Dorogomilov suburb, where they had ampleoom. The main army was on the other side of Moscow or beyond it.
	At that very time, at ten in the morning of the second of September,apoleon was standing among his troops on the Poklonny Hill looking athe panorama spread out before him. From the twenty-sixth of August tohe second of September, that is from the battle of Borodino to thentry of the French into Moscow, during the whole of that agitating,emorable week, there had been the extraordinary autumn weather thatlways comes as a surprise, when the sun hangs low and gives more heathan in spring, when everything shines so brightly in the rare cleartmosphere that the eyes smart, when the lungs are strengthened andefreshed by inhaling the aromatic autumn air, when even the nightsre warm, and when in those dark warm nights, golden stars startle andelight us continually by falling from the sky.
	At ten in the morning of the second of September this weathertill held.
	The brightness of the morning was magical. Moscow seen from theoklonny Hill lay spaciously spread out with her river, her gardens,nd her churches, and she seemed to be living her usual life, herupolas glittering like stars in the sunlight.
	The view of the strange city with its peculiar architecture, such ase had never seen before, filled Napoleon with the rather enviousnd uneasy curiosity men feel when they see an alien form of life thatas no knowledge of them. This city was evidently living with the fullorce of its own life. By the indefinite signs which, even at aistance, distinguish a living body from a dead one, Napoleon from theoklonny Hill perceived the throb of life in the town and felt, ast were, the breathing of that great and beautiful body.
	Every Russian looking at Moscow feels her to be a mother; everyoreigner who sees her, even if ignorant of her significance as theother city, must feel her feminine character, and Napoleon felt it.
	"Cette ville asiatique aux innombrables eglises, Moscou la sainte.a voila done enfin, cette fameuse ville! Il etait temps,"* said he,nd dismounting he ordered a plan of Moscow to be spread out beforeim, and summoned Lelorgne d'Ideville, the interpreter.
	*"That Asiatic city of the innumerable churches, holy Moscow! Heret is then at last, that famous city. It was high time."
	"A town captured by the enemy is like a maid who has lost heronor," thought he (he had said so to Tuchkov at Smolensk). Fromhat point of view he gazed at the Oriental beauty he had not seenefore. It seemed strange to him that his long-felt wish, which hadeemed unattainable, had at last been realized. In the clear morningight he gazed now at the city and now at the plan, considering itsetails, and the assurance of possessing it agitated and awed him.
	"But could it be otherwise?" he thought. "Here is this capital at myeet. Where is Alexander now, and of what is he thinking? A strange,eautiful, and majestic city; and a strange and majestic moment! Inhat light must I appear to them!" thought he, thinking of his troops.Here she is, the reward for all those fainthearted men," heeflected, glancing at those near him and at the troops who werepproaching and forming up. "One word from me, one movement of myand, and that ancient capital of the Tsars would perish. But mylemency is always ready to descend upon the vanquished. I must beagnanimous and truly great. But no, it can't be true that I am inoscow," he suddenly thought. "Yet here she is lying at my feet,ith her golden domes and crosses scintillating and twinkling in theunshine. But I shall spare her. On the ancient monuments of barbarismnd despotism I will inscribe great words of justice and mercy....t is just this which Alexander will feel most painfully, I know him."It seemed to Napoleon that the chief import of what was takinglace lay in the personal struggle between himself and Alexander.)From the height of the Kremlin- yes, there is the Kremlin, yes- Iill give them just laws; I will teach them the meaning of trueivilization, I will make generations of boyars remember theironqueror with love. I will tell the deputation that I did not, and doot, desire war, that I have waged war only against the false policyf their court; that I love and respect Alexander and that in Moscow Iill accept terms of peace worthy of myself and of my people. I do notish to utilize the fortunes of war to humiliate an honored monarch.Boyars,' I will say to them, 'I do not desire war, I desire the peacend welfare of all my subjects.' However, I know their presence willnspire me, and I shall speak to them as I always do: clearly,mpressively, and majestically. But can it be true that I am inoscow? Yes, there she lies."
	"Qu'on m'amene les boyars,"* said he to his suite.
	*"Bring the boyars to me."
	A general with a brilliant suite galloped off at once to fetch theoyars.
	Two hours passed. Napoleon had lunched and was again standing in theame place on the Poklonny Hill awaiting the deputation. His speech tohe boyars had already taken definite shape in his imagination. Thatpeech was full of dignity and greatness as Napoleon understood it.
	He was himself carried away by the tone of magnanimity he intendedo adopt toward Moscow. In his imagination he appointed days forssemblies at the palace of the Tsars, at which Russian notables andis own would mingle. He mentally appointed a governor, one whoould win the hearts of the people. Having learned that there wereany charitable institutions in Moscow he mentally decided that heould shower favors on them all. He thought that, as in Africa head to put on a burnoose and sit in a mosque, so in Moscow he muste beneficent like the Tsars. And in order finally to touch the heartsf the Russians- and being like all Frenchmen unable to imaginenything sentimental without a reference to ma chere, ma tendre, maauvre mere* - he decided that he would place an inscription on allhese establishments in large letters: "This establishment isedicated to my dear mother." Or no, it should be simply: Maison de maere,*[2] he concluded. "But am I really in Moscow? Yes, here ities before me, but why is the deputation from the city so long inppearing?" he wondered.
	*"My dear, my tender, my poor mother."
	*[2] "House of my Mother."
	Meanwhile an agitated consultation was being carried on inhispers among his generals and marshals at the rear of his suite.hose sent to fetch the deputation had returned with the news thatoscow was empty, that everyone had left it. The faces of those whoere not conferring together were pale and perturbed. They were notlarmed by the fact that Moscow had been abandoned by itsnhabitants (grave as that fact seemed), but by the question how toell the Emperor- without putting him in the terrible position ofppearing ridiculous- that he had been awaiting the boyars so longn vain: that there were drunken mobs left in Moscow but no onelse. Some said that a deputation of some sort must be scrapedogether, others disputed that opinion and maintained that the Emperorhould first be carefully and skillfully prepared, and then told theruth.
	"He will have to be told, all the same," said some gentlemen ofhe suite. "But, gentlemen..."
	The position was the more awkward because the Emperor, meditatingpon his magnanimous plans, was pacing patiently up and down beforehe outspread map, occasionally glancing along the road to Moscow fromnder his lifted hand with a bright and proud smile.
	"But it's impossible..." declared the gentlemen of the suite,hrugging their shoulders but not venturing to utter the implied word-e ridicule...
	At last the Emperor, tired of futile expectation, his actor'snstinct suggesting to him that the sublime moment having been tooong drawn out was beginning to lose its sublimity, gave a sign withis hand. A single report of a signaling gun followed, and the troops,ho were already spread out on different sides of Moscow, moved intohe city through Tver, Kaluga, and Dorogomilov gates. Faster andaster, vying with one another, they moved at the double or at a trot,anishing amid the clouds of dust they raised and making the airing with a deafening roar of mingling shouts.
	Drawn on by the movement of his troops Napoleon rode with them asar as the Dorogomilov gate, but there again stopped and,ismounting from his horse, paced for a long time by theammer-Kollezski rampart, awaiting the deputation.BK11|CH20
	CHAPTER XX
	Meanwhile Moscow was empty. There were still people in it, perhaps aiftieth part of its former inhabitants had remained, but it wasmpty. It was empty in the sense that a dying queenless hive is empty.
	In a queenless hive no life is left though to a superficial glancet seems as much alive as other hives.
	The bees circle round a queenless hive in the hot beams of theidday sun as gaily as around the living hives; from a distance itmells of honey like the others, and bees fly in and out in the sameay. But one has only to observe that hive to realize that there is noonger any life in it. The bees do not fly in the same way, themell and the sound that meet the beekeeper are not the same. To theeekeeper's tap on the wall of the sick hive, instead of the formernstant unanimous humming of tens of thousands of bees with theirbdomens threateningly compressed, and producing by the rapidibration of their wings an aerial living sound, the only reply is aisconnected buzzing from different parts of the deserted hive. Fromhe alighting board, instead of the former spirituous fragrant smellf honey and venom, and the warm whiffs of crowded life, comes an odorf emptiness and decay mingling with the smell of honey. There areo longer sentinels sounding the alarm with their abdomens raised, andeady to die in defense of the hive. There is no longer the measureduiet sound of throbbing activity, like the sound of boiling water,ut diverse discordant sounds of disorder. In and out of the hive longlack robber bees smeared with honey fly timidly and shiftily. They doot sting, but crawl away from danger. Formerly only bees laden withoney flew into the hive, and they flew out empty; now they fly outaden. The beekeeper opens the lower part of the hive and peers in.nstead of black, glossy bees- tamed by toil, clinging to onenother's legs and drawing out the wax, with a ceaseless hum of labor-hat used to hang in long clusters down to the floor of the hive,rowsy shriveled bees crawl about separately in various directionsn the floor and walls of the hive. Instead of a neatly glued floor,wept by the bees with the fanning of their wings, there is a floorittered with bits of wax, excrement, dying bees scarcely moving theiregs, and dead ones that have not been cleared away.
	The beekeeper opens the upper part of the hive and examines theuper. Instead of serried rows of bees sealing up every gap in theombs and keeping the brood warm, he sees the skillful complextructures of the combs, but no longer in their former state ofurity. All is neglected and foul. Black robber bees are swiftly andtealthily prowling about the combs, and the short home bees,hriveled and listless as if they were old, creep slowly about withoutrying to hinder the robbers, having lost all motive and all sensef life. Drones, bumblebees, wasps, and butterflies knock awkwardlygainst the walls of the hive in their flight. Here and there amonghe cells containing dead brood and honey an angry buzzing canometimes be heard. Here and there a couple of bees, by force of habitnd custom cleaning out the brood cells, with efforts beyond theirtrength laboriously drag away a dead bee or bumblebee without knowinghy they do it. In another corner two old bees are languidly fighting,r cleaning themselves, or feeding one another, without themselvesnowing whether they do it with friendly or hostile intent. In a thirdlace a crowd of bees, crushing one another, attack some victim andight and smother it, and the victim, enfeebled or killed, dropsrom above slowly and lightly as a feather, among the heap of corpses.he keeper opens the two center partitions to examine the brood cells.n place of the former close dark circles formed by thousands ofees sitting back to back and guarding the high mystery of generation,e sees hundreds of dull, listless, and sleepy shells of bees. Theyave almost all died unawares, sitting in the sanctuary they haduarded and which is now no more. They reek of decay and death. Only aew of them still move, rise, and feebly fly to settle on thenemy's hand, lacking the spirit to die stinging him; the rest areead and fall as lightly as fish scales. The beekeeper closes theive, chalks a mark on it, and when he has time tears out its contentsnd burns it clean.
	So in the same way Moscow was empty when Napoleon, weary, uneasy,nd morose, paced up and down in front of the Kammer-Kollezskiampart, awaiting what to his mind was a necessary, if but formal,bservance of the proprieties- a deputation.
	In various corners of Moscow there still remained a few peopleimlessly moving about, following their old habits and hardly aware ofhat they were doing.
	When with due circumspection Napoleon was informed that Moscow wasmpty, he looked angrily at his informant, turned away, and silentlyontinued to walk to and fro.
	"My carriage!" he said.
	He took his seat beside the aide-de-camp on duty and drove intohe suburb. "Moscow deserted!" he said to himself. "What an incrediblevent!"
	He did not drive into the town, but put up at an inn in theorogomilov suburb.
	The coup de theatre had not come off.BK11|CH21
	CHAPTER XXI
	The Russian troops were passing through Moscow from two o'clock atight till two in the afternoon and bore away with them the woundednd the last of the inhabitants who were leaving.
	The greatest crush during the movement of the troops took place athe Stone, Moskva, and Yauza bridges.
	While the troops, dividing into two parts when passing around theremlin, were thronging the Moskva and the Stone bridges, a great manyoldiers, taking advantage of the stoppage and congestion, turned backrom the bridges and slipped stealthily and silently past the churchf Vasili the Beatified and under the Borovitski gate, back up theill to the Red Square where some instinct told them they could easilyake things not belonging to them. Crowds of the kind seen at cheapales filled all the passages and alleys of the Bazaar. But there wereo dealers with voices of ingratiating affability inviting customerso enter; there were no hawkers, nor the usual motley crowd ofemale purchasers- but only soldiers, in uniforms and overcoats thoughithout muskets, entering the Bazaar empty-handed and silentlyaking their way out through its passages with bundles. Tradesmennd their assistants (of whom there were but few) moved about amonghe soldiers quite bewildered. They unlocked their shops and lockedhem up again, and themselves carried goods away with the help theirssistants. On the square in front of the Bazaar were drummers beatinghe muster call. But the roll of the drums did not make the lootingoldiers run in the direction of the drum as formerly, but madehem, on the contrary, run farther away. Among the soldiers in thehops and passages some men were to be seen in gray coats, withlosely shaven heads. Two officers, one with a scarf over hisniform and mounted on a lean, dark-gray horse, the other in anvercoat and on foot, stood at the corner of Ilyinka Street,alking. A third officer galloped up to them.
	"The general orders them all to be driven out at once, without fail.his is outrageous! Half the men have dispersed."
	"Where are you off to?... Where?..." he shouted to three infantrymenithout muskets who, holding up the skirts of their overcoats, werelipping past him into the Bazaar passage. "Stop, you rascals!"
	"But how are you going to stop them?" replied another officer.There is no getting them together. The army should push on before theest bolt, that's all!"
	"How can one push on? They are stuck there, wedged on the bridge,nd don't move. Shouldn't we put a cordon round to prevent the restrom running away?"
	"Come, go in there and drive them out!" shouted the senior officer.
	The officer in the scarf dismounted, called up a drummer, and wentith him into the arcade. Some soldiers started running away in aroup. A shopkeeper with red pimples on his cheeks near the nose,nd a calm, persistent, calculating expression on his plump face,urriedly and ostentatiously approached the officer, swinging hisrms.
	"Your honor!" said he. "Be so good as to protect us! We won't grudgerifles, you are welcome to anything- we shall be delighted!ray!... I'll fetch a piece of cloth at once for such an honorableentleman, or even two pieces with pleasure. For we feel how it is;ut what's all this- sheer robbery! If you please, could not guards belaced if only to let us close the shop...."
	Several shopkeepers crowded round the officer.
	"Eh, what twaddle!" said one of them, a thin, stern-looking man.When one's head is gone one doesn't weep for one's hair! Take whatny of you like!" And flourishing his arm energetically he turnedideways to the officer.
	"It's all very well for you, Ivan Sidorych, to talk," said the firstradesman angrily. "Please step inside, your honor!"
	"Talk indeed!" cried the thin one. "In my three shops here I have hundred thousand rubles' worth of goods. Can they be saved whenhe army has gone? Eh, what people! 'Against God's might our handsan't fight.'"
	"Come inside, your honor!" repeated the tradesman, bowing.
	The officer stood perplexed and his face showed indecision.
	"It's not my business!" he exclaimed, and strode on quickly down onef the passages.
	From one open shop came the sound of blows and vituperation, andust as the officer came up to it a man in a gray coat with a shavenead was flung out violently.
	This man, bent double, rushed past the tradesman and the officer.he officer pounced on the soldiers who were in the shops, but at thatoment fearful screams reached them from the huge crowd on theoskva bridge and the officer ran out into the square.
	"What is it? What is it?" he asked, but his comrade was alreadyalloping off past Vasili the Beatified in the direction from whichhe screams came.
	The officer mounted his horse and rode after him. When he reachedhe bridge he saw two unlimbered guns, the infantry crossing theridge, several overturned carts, and frightened and laughing facesmong the troops. Beside the cannon a cart was standing to which twoorses were harnessed. Four borzois with collars were pressing closeo the wheels. The cart was loaded high, and at the very top, beside ahild's chair with its legs in the air, sat a peasant woman utteringiercing and desperate shrieks. He was told by his fellow officershat the screams of the crowd and the shrieks of the woman were due tohe fact that General Ermolov, coming up to the crowd and learninghat soldiers were dispersing among the shops while crowds ofivilians blocked the bridge, had ordered two guns to be unlimberednd made a show of firing at the bridge. The crowd, crushing onenother, upsetting carts, and shouting and squeezing desperately,ad cleared off the bridge and the troops were now moving forward.BK11|CH22
	CHAPTER XXII
	Meanwhile, the city itself was deserted. There was hardly anyonen the streets. The gates and shops were all closed, only here andhere round the taverns solitary shouts or drunken songs could beeard. Nobody drove through the streets and footsteps were rarelyeard. The Povarskaya was quite still and deserted. The huge courtyardf the Rostovs' house was littered with wisps of hay and with dungrom the horses, and not a soul was to be seen there. In the greatrawing room of the house, which had been left with all itontained, were two people. They were the yard porter Ignat, and theage boy Mishka, Vasilich's grandson who had stayed in Moscow with hisrandfather. Mishka had opened the clavichord and was strumming ont with one finger. The yard porter, his arms akimbo, stood smilingith satisfaction before the large mirror.
	"Isn't it fine, eh, Uncle Ignat?" said the boy, suddenly beginningo strike the keyboard with both hands.
	"Only fancy!" answered Ignat, surprised at the broadening grin onis face in the mirror.
	"Impudence! Impudence!" they heard behind them the voice of Mavrauzminichna who had entered silently. "How he's grinning, the fat mug!s that what you're here for? Nothing's cleared away down there andasilich is worn out. Just you wait a bit!"
	Ignat left off smiling, adjusted his belt, and went out of theoom with meekly downcast eyes.
	"Aunt, I did it gently," said the boy.
	"I'll give you something gently, you monkey you!" cried Mavrauzminichna, raising her arm threateningly. "Go and get the samovar tooil for your grandfather."
	Mavra Kuzminichna flicked the dust off the clavichord and closed it,nd with a deep sigh left the drawing room and locked its main door.
	Going out into the yard she paused to consider where she should goext- to drink tea in the servants' wing with Vasilich, or into thetoreroom to put away what still lay about.
	She heard the sound of quick footsteps in the quiet street.omeone stopped at the gate, and the latch rattled as someone tried topen it. Mavra Kuzminichna went to the gate.
	"Who do you want?"
	"The count- Count Ilya Andreevich Rostov."
	"And who are you?"
	"An officer, I have to see him," came the reply in a pleasant,ell-bred Russian voice.
	Mavra Kuzminichna opened the gate and an officer of eighteen, withhe round face of a Rostov, entered the yard.
	"They have gone away, sir. Went away yesterday at vespertime,"aid Mavra Kuzminichna cordially.
	The young officer standing in the gateway, as if hesitatinghether to enter or not, clicked his tongue.
	"Ah, how annoying!" he muttered. "I should have come yesterday....h, what a pity."
	Meanwhile, Mavra Kuzminichna was attentively and sympatheticallyxamining the familiar Rostov features of the young man's face, hisattered coat and trodden-down boots.
	"What did you want to see the count for?" she asked.
	"Oh well... it can't be helped!" said he in a tone of vexation andlaced his hand on the gate as if to leave.
	He again paused in indecision.
	"You see," he suddenly said, "I am a kinsman of the count's and heas been very kind to me. As you see" (he glanced with an amused airnd good-natured smile at his coat and boots) "my things are wornut and I have no money, so I was going to ask the count..."
	Mavra Kuzminichna did not let him finish.
	"Just wait a minute, sir. One little moment," said she.
	And as soon as the officer let go of the gate handle she turned and,urrying away on her old legs, went through the back yard to theervants' quarters.
	While Mavra Kuzminichna was running to her room the officer walkedbout the yard gazing at his worn-out boots with lowered head and aaint smile on his lips. "What a pity I've missed Uncle! What a niceld woman! Where has she run off to? And how am I to find theearest way to overtake my regiment, which must by now be getting nearhe Rogozhski gate?" thought he. Just then Mavra Kuzminichnappeared from behind the corner of the house with a frightened yetesolute look, carrying a rolled-up check kerchief in her hand.hile still a few steps from the officer she unfolded the kerchief andook out of it a white twenty-five-ruble assignat and hastily handedt to him.
	"If his excellency had been at home, as a kinsman he would ofourse... but as it is..."
	Mavra Kuzminichna grew abashed and confused. The officer did notecline, but took the note quietly and thanked her.
	"If the count had been at home..." Mavra Kuzminichna went onpologetically. "Christ be with you, sir! May God preserve you!"aid she, bowing as she saw him out.
	Swaying his head and smiling as if amused at himself, the officeran almost at a trot through the deserted streets toward the Yauzaridge to overtake his regiment.
	But Mavra Kuzminichna stood at the closed gate for some time withoist eyes, pensively swaying her head and feeling an unexpectedlow of motherly tenderness and pity for the unknown young officer.BK11|CH23
	CHAPTER XXIII
	From an unfinished house on the Varvarka, the ground floor ofhich was a dramshop, came drunken shouts and songs. On benchesound the tables in a dirty little room sat some ten factory hands.ipsy and perspiring, with dim eyes and wide-open mouths, they werell laboriously singing some song or other. They were singingiscordantly, arduously, and with great effort, evidently notecause they wished to sing, but because they wanted to show they wererunk and on a spree. One, a tall, fair-haired lad in a clean blueoat, was standing over the others. His face with its fine straightose would have been handsome had it not been for his thin,ompressed, twitching lips and dull, gloomy, fixed eyes. Evidentlyossessed by some idea, he stood over those who were singing, andolemnly and jerkily flourished above their heads his white arm withhe sleeve turned up to the elbow, trying unnaturally to spread outis dirty fingers. The sleeve of his coat kept slipping down and helways carefully rolled it up again with his left hand, as if itere most important that the sinewy white arm he was flourishinghould be bare. In the midst of the song cries were heard, andighting and blows in the passage and porch. The tall lad waved hisrm.
	"Stop it!" he exclaimed peremptorily. "There's a fight, lads!"nd, still rolling up his sleeve, he went out to the porch.
	The factory hands followed him. These men, who under theeadership of the tall lad were drinking in the dramshop that morning,ad brought the publican some skins from the factory and for thisad had drink served them. The blacksmiths from a neighboringmithy, hearing the sounds of revelry in the tavern and supposing ito have been broken into, wished to force their way in too and a fightn the porch had resulted.
	The publican was fighting one of the smiths at the door, and whenhe workmen came out the smith, wrenching himself free from the taverneeper, fell face downward on the pavement.
	Another smith tried to enter the doorway, pressing against theublican with his chest.
	The lad with the turned-up sleeve gave the smith a blow in theace and cried wildly: "They're fighting us, lads!"
	At that moment the first smith got up and, scratching his bruisedace to make it bleed, shouted in a tearful voice: "Police! Murder!...hey've killed a man, lads!"
	"Oh, gracious me, a man beaten to death- killed!..." screamed aoman coming out of a gate close by.
	A crowd gathered round the bloodstained smith.
	"Haven't you robbed people enough- taking their last shirts?" said aoice addressing the publican. "What have you killed a man for, youhief?"
	The tall lad, standing in the porch, turned his bleared eyes fromhe publican to the smith and back again as if considering whom heught to fight now.
	"Murderer!" he shouted suddenly to the publican. "Bind him, lads!"
	"I daresay you would like to bind me!" shouted the publican, pushingway the men advancing on him, and snatching his cap from his heade flung it on the ground.
	As if this action had some mysterious and menacing significance, theorkmen surrounding the publican paused in indecision.
	"I know the law very well, mates! I'll take the matter to theaptain of police. You think I won't get to him? Robbery is notermitted to anybody now a days!" shouted the publican, picking up hisap.
	"Come along then! Come along then!" the publican and the talloung fellow repeated one after the other, and they moved up thetreet together.
	The bloodstained smith went beside them. The factory hands andthers followed behind, talking and shouting.
	At the corner of the Moroseyka, opposite a large house with closedhutters and bearing a bootmaker's signboard, stood a score of thin,orn-out, gloomy-faced bootmakers, wearing overalls and longattered coats.
	"He should pay folks off properly," a thin workingman, with frowningrows and a straggly beard, was saying.
	"But he's sucked our blood and now he thinks he's quit of us. He'seen misleading us all the week and now that he's brought us to thisass he's made off."
	On seeing the crowd and the bloodstained man the workman ceasedpeaking, and with eager curiosity all the bootmakers joined theoving crowd.
	"Where are all the folks going?"
	"Why, to the police, of course!"
	"I say, is it true that we have been beaten?" "And what did youhink? Look what folks are saying."
	Questions and answers were heard. The publican, taking advantagef the increased crowd, dropped behind and returned to his tavern.
	The tall youth, not noticing the disappearance of his foe, waved hisare arm and went on talking incessantly, attracting general attentiono himself. It was around him that the people chiefly crowded,xpecting answers from him to the questions that occupied all theirinds.
	"He must keep order, keep the law, that's what the government ishere for. Am I not right, good Christians?" said the tall youth, with scarcely perceptible smile. "He thinks there's no government! Howan one do without government? Or else there would be plenty who'd robs."
	"Why talk nonsense?" rejoined voices in the crowd. "Will they givep Moscow like this? They told you that for fun, and you believedt! Aren't there plenty of troops on the march? Let him in, indeed!hat's what the government is for. You'd better listen to whateople are saying," said some of the mob pointing to the tall youth.
	By the wall of China-Town a smaller group of people were gatheredound a man in a frieze coat who held a paper in his hand.
	"An ukase, they are reading an ukase! Reading an ukase!" criedoices in the crowd, and the people rushed toward the reader.
	The man in the frieze coat was reading the broadsheet of August 31hen the crowd collected round him he seemed confused, but at theemand of the tall lad who had pushed his way up to him, he began in aather tremulous voice to read the sheet from the beginning.
	"Early tomorrow I shall go to his Serene Highness," he read"Sirin Highness," said the tall fellow with a triumphant smile on hisips and a frown on his brow), "to consult with him to act, and to aidhe army to exterminate these scoundrels. We too will take part..."he reader went on, and then paused ("Do you see," shouted the youthictoriously, "he's going to clear up the whole affair forou...."), "in destroying them, and will send these visitors to theevil. I will come back to dinner, and we'll set to work. We willo, completely do, and undo these scoundrels."
	The last words were read out in the midst of complete silence. Theall lad hung his head gloomily. It was evident that no one hadnderstood the last part. In particular, the words "I will come backo dinner," evidently displeased both reader and audience. Theeople's minds were tuned to a high pitch and this was too simplend needlessly comprehensible- it was what any one of them mightave said and therefore was what an ukase emanating from the highestuthority should not say.
	They all stood despondent and silent. The tall youth moved hisips and swayed from side to side.
	"We should ask him... that's he himself?"... "Yes, ask himndeed!... Why not? He'll explain"... voices in the rear of therowd were suddenly heard saying, and the general attention turnedo the police superintendent's trap which drove into the squarettended by two mounted dragoons.
	The superintendent of police, who had that morning by Countostopchin's orders to burn the barges and had in connection with thatatter acquired a large sum of money which was at that moment in hisocket, on seeing a crowd bearing down upon him told his coachman totop.
	"What people are these?" he shouted to the men, who were movingingly and timidly in the direction of his trap.
	"What people are these?" he shouted again, receiving no answer.
	"Your honor..." replied the shopman in the frieze coat, "your honor,n accord with the proclamation of his highest excellency the count,hey desire to serve, not sparing their lives, and it is not anyind of riot, but as his highest excellence said..."
	"The count has not left, he is here, and an order will be issuedoncerning you," said the superintendent of police. "Go on!" herdered his coachman.
	The crowd halted, pressing around those who had heard what theuperintendent had said, and looking at the departing trap.
	The superintendent of police turned round at that moment with acared look, said something to his coachman, and his horsesncreased their speed.
	"It's a fraud, lads! Lead the way to him, himself!" shouted the tallouth. "Don't let him go, lads! Let him answer us! Keep him!"houted different people and the people dashed in pursuit of the trap.
	Following the superintendent of police and talking loudly therowd went in the direction of the Lubyanka Street.
	"There now, the gentry and merchants have gone away and left us toerish. Do they think we're dogs?" voices in the crowd were heardaying more and more frequently.BK11|CH24
	CHAPTER XXIV
	On the evening of the first of September, after his interview withutuzov, Count Rostopchin had returned to Moscow mortified andffended because he had not been invited to attend the council of war,nd because Kutuzov had paid no attention to his offer to take part inhe defense of the city; amazed also at the novel outlook revealedo him at the camp, which treated the tranquillity of the capitalnd its patriotic fervor as not merely secondary but quiterrelevant and unimportant matters. Distressed, offended, andurprised by all this, Rostopchin had returned to Moscow. After suppere lay down on a sofa without undressing, and was awakened soonfter midnight by a courier bringing him a letter from Kutuzov. Thisetter requested the count to send police officers to guide the troopshrough the town, as the army was retreating to the Ryazan road beyondoscow. This was not news to Rostopchin. He had known that Moscowould be abandoned not merely since his interview the previous dayith Kutuzov on the Poklonny Hill but ever since the battle oforodino, for all the generals who came to Moscow after that battlead said unanimously that it was impossible to fight another battle,nd since then the government property had been removed every night,nd half the inhabitants had left the city with Rostopchin's ownermission. Yet all the same this information astonished and irritatedhe count, coming as it did in the form of a simple note with an orderrom Kutuzov, and received at night, breaking in on his beauty sleep.
	When later on in his memoirs Count Rostopchin explained hisctions at this time, he repeatedly says that he was then actuatedy two important considerations: to maintain tranquillity in Moscownd expedite the departure of the inhabitants. If one accepts thiswofold aim all Rostopchin's actions appear irreproachable. "Whyere the holy relics, the arms, ammunition, gunpowder, and stores oforn not removed? Why were thousands of inhabitants deceived intoelieving that Moscow would not be given up- and thereby ruined?"To presence the tranquillity of the city," explains Count Rostopchin.Why were bundles of useless papers from the government offices, andeppich's balloon and other articles removed?" "To leave the townmpty," explains Count Rostopchin. One need only admit that publicranquillity is in danger and any action finds a justification.
	All the horrors of the reign of terror were based only on solicitudeor public tranquillity.
	On what, then, was Count Rostopchin's fear for the tranquillity ofoscow based in 1812? What reason was there for assuming anyrobability of an uprising in the city? The inhabitants were leavingt and the retreating troops were filling it. Why should that causehe masses to riot?
	Neither in Moscow nor anywhere in Russia did anything resemblingn insurrection ever occur when the enemy entered a town. More thanen thousand people were still in Moscow on the first and second ofeptember, and except for a mob in the governor's courtyard, assembledhere at his bidding, nothing happened. It is obvious that there wouldave been even less reason to expect a disturbance among the people iffter the battle of Borodino, when the surrender of Moscow becameertain or at least probable, Rostopchin instead of exciting theeople by distributing arms and broadsheets had taken steps toemove all the holy relics, the gunpowder, munitions, and money, andad told the population plainly that the town would be abandoned.
	Rostopchin, though he had patriotic sentiments, was a sanguine andmpulsive man who had always moved in the highest administrativeircles and had no understanding at all of the people he supposedimself to be guiding. Ever since the enemy's entry into Smolensk head in imagination been playing the role of director of the populareeling of "the heart of Russia." Not only did it seem to him (as toll administrators) that he controlled the external actions ofoscow's inhabitants, but he also thought he controlled their mentalttitude by means of his broadsheets and posters, written in aoarse tone which the people despise in their own class and do notnderstand from those in authority. Rostopchin was so pleased with theine role of leader of popular feeling, and had grown so used to it,hat the necessity of relinquishing that role and abandoning Moscowithout any heroic display took him unawares and he suddenly felthe ground slip away from under his feet, so that he positively didot know what to do. Though he knew it was coming, he did not till theast moment wholeheartedly believe that Moscow would be abandoned, andid not prepare for it. The inhabitants left against his wishes. Ifhe government offices were removed, this was only done on theemand of officials to whom the count yielded reluctantly. He wasbsorbed in the role he had created for himself. As is often thease with those gifted with an ardent imagination, though he hadong known that Moscow would be abandoned he knew it only with hisntellect, he did not believe it in his heart and did not adaptimself mentally to this new position of affairs.
	All his painstaking and energetic activity (in how far it was usefulnd had any effect on the people is another question) had beenimply directed toward arousing in the masses his own feeling ofatriotic hatred of the French.
	But when events assumed their true historical character, whenxpressing hatred for the French in words proved insufficient, when itas not even possible to express that hatred by fighting a battle,hen self-confidence was of no avail in relation to the one questionefore Moscow, when the whole population streamed out of Moscow as onean, abandoning their belongings and proving by that negative actionll the depth of their national feeling, then the role chosen byostopchin suddenly appeared senseless. He unexpectedly felt himselfidiculous, weak, and alone, with no ground to stand on.
	When, awakened from his sleep, he received that cold, peremptoryote from Kutuzov, he felt the more irritated the more he felt himselfo blame. All that he had been specially put in charge of, the stateroperty which he should have removed, was still in Moscow and itas no longer possible to take the whole of it away.
	"Who is to blame for it? Who has let things come to such a pass?" heuminated. "Not I, of course. I had everything ready. I had Moscowirmly in hand. And this is what they have let it come to! Villains!raitors!" he thought, without clearly defining who the villains andraitors were, but feeling it necessary to hate those traitors whoeverhey might be who were to blame for the false and ridiculousosition in which he found himself.
	All that night Count Rostopchin issued orders, for which people cameo him from all parts of Moscow. Those about him had never seen theount so morose and irritable.
	"Your excellency, the Director of the Registrar's Department hasent for instructions... From the Consistory, from the Senate, fromhe University, from the Foundling Hospital, the Suffragan has sent...sking for information.... What are your orders about the Firerigade? From the governor of the prison... from the superintendent ofhe lunatic asylum..." All night long such announcements wereontinually being received by the count.
	To all these inquiries he gave brief and angry replies indicatinghat orders from him were not now needed, that the whole affair,arefully prepared by him, had now been ruined by somebody, and thathat somebody would have to bear the whole responsibility for all thatight happen.
	"Oh, tell that blockhead," he said in reply to the question from theegistrar's Department, "that he should remain to guard his documents.ow why are you asking silly questions about the Fire Brigade? Theyave horses, let them be off to Vladimir, and not leave them to therench."
	"Your excellency, the superintendent of the lunatic asylum has come:hat are your commands?"
	"My commands? Let them go away, that's all.... And let theunatics out into the town. When lunatics command our armies Godvidently means these other madmen to be free."
	In reply to an inquiry about the convicts in the prison, Countostopchin shouted angrily at the governor:
	"Do you expect me to give you two battalions- which we have not got-or a convoy? Release them, that's all about it!"
	"Your excellency, there are some political prisoners, Meshkov,ereshchagin..."
	"Vereshchagin! Hasn't he been hanged yet?" shouted Rostopchin.Bring him to me!"BK11|CH25
	CHAPTER XXV
	Toward nine o'clock in the morning, when the troops were alreadyoving through Moscow, nobody came to the count any more fornstructions. Those who were able to get away were going of theirwn accord, those who remained behind decided for themselves what theyust do.
	The count ordered his carriage that he might drive to Sokolniki, andat in his study with folded hands, morose, sallow, and taciturn.
	In quiet and untroubled times it seems to every administrator thatt is only by his efforts that the whole population under his rules kept going, and in this consciousness of being indispensablevery administrator finds the chief reward of his labor and efforts.hile the sea of history remains calm the ruler-administrator in hisrail bark, holding on with a boat hook to the ship of the peoplend himself moving, naturally imagines that his efforts move thehip he is holding on to. But as soon as a storm arises and the seaegins to heave and the ship to move, such a delusion is no longerossible. The ship moves independently with its own enormous motion,he boat hook no longer reaches the moving vessel, and suddenly thedministrator, instead of appearing a ruler and a source of power,ecomes an insignificant, useless, feeble man.
	Rostopchin felt this, and it was this which exasperated him.
	The superintendent of police, whom the crowd had stopped, went in toee him at the same time as an adjutant who informed the count thathe horses were harnessed. They were both pale, and the superintendentf police, after reporting that he had executed the instructions head received, informed the count that an immense crowd had collectedn the courtyard and wished to see him.
	Without saying a word Rostopchin rose and walked hastily to hisight, luxurious drawing room, went to the balcony door, took holdf the handle, let it go again, and went to the window from which head a better view of the whole crowd. The tall lad was standing inront, flourishing his arm and saying something with a stern look. Thelood stained smith stood beside him with a gloomy face. A drone ofoices was audible through the closed window.
	"Is my carriage ready?" asked Rostopchin, stepping back from theindow.
	"It is, your excellency," replied the adjutant.
	Rostopchin went again to the balcony door.
	"But what do they want?" he asked the superintendent of police.
	"Your excellency, they say they have got ready, according to yourrders, to go against the French, and they shouted something aboutreachery. But it is a turbulent crowd, your excellency- I hardlyanaged to get away from it. Your excellency, I venture to suggest..."
	"You may go. I don't need you to tell me what to do!" exclaimedostopchin angrily.
	He stood by the balcony door looking at the crowd.
	"This is what they have done with Russia! This is what they haveone with me!" thought he, full of an irrepressible fury that welledp within him against the someone to whom what was happening mighte attributed. As often happens with passionate people, he wasastered by anger but was still seeking an object on which to vent it.Here is that mob, the dregs of the people," he thought as he gazed athe crowd: "this rabble they have roused by their folly! They want aictim," he thought as he looked at the tall lad flourishing hisrm. And this thought occurred to him just because he himselfesired a victim, something on which to vent his rage.
	"Is the carriage ready?" he asked again.
	"Yes, your excellency. What are your orders about Vereshchagin? Hes waiting at the porch," said the adjutant.
	"Ah!" exclaimed Rostopchin, as if struck by an unexpectedecollection.
	And rapidly opening the door he went resolutely out onto thealcony. The talking instantly ceased, hats and caps were doffed,nd all eyes were raised to the count.
	"Good morning, lads!" said the count briskly and loudly. "Thankou for coming. I'll come out to you in a moment, but we must firstettle with the villain. We must punish the villain who has caused theuin of Moscow. Wait for me!"
	And the count stepped as briskly back into the room and slammedhe door behind him.
	A murmur of approbation and satisfaction ran through the crowd.He'll settle with all the villains, you'll see! And you said therench... He'll show you what law is!" the mob were saying as ifeproving one another for their lack of confidence.
	A few minutes later an officer came hurriedly out of the front door,ave an order, and the dragoons formed up in line. The crowd movedagerly from the balcony toward the porch. Rostopchin, coming outhere with quick angry steps, looked hastily around as if seekingomeone.
	"Where is he?" he inquired. And as he spoke he saw a young manoming round the corner of the house between two dragoons. He had aong thin neck, and his head, that had been half shaved, was againovered by short hair. This young man was dressed in a threadbare blueloth coat lined with fox fur, that had once been smart, and dirtyempen convict trousers, over which were pulled his thin, dirty,rodden-down boots. On his thin, weak legs were heavy chains whichampered his irresolute movements.
	"Ah!" said Rostopchin, hurriedly turning away his eyes from theoung man in the fur-lined coat and pointing to the bottom step of theorch. "Put him there."
	The young man in his clattering chains stepped clumsily to thepot indicated, holding away with one finger the coat collar whichhafed his neck, turned his long neck twice this way and that, sighed,nd submissively folded before him his thin hands, unused to work.
	For several seconds while the young man was taking his place onhe step the silence continued. Only among the back rows of theeople, who were all pressing toward the one spot, could sighs,roans, and the shuffling of feet be heard.
	While waiting for the young man to take his place on the stepostopchin stood frowning and rubbing his face with his hand.
	"Lads!" said he, with a metallic ring in his voice. "This man,ereshchagin, is the scoundrel by whose doing Moscow is perishing."
	The young man in the fur-lined coat, stooping a little, stood in aubmissive attitude, his fingers clasped before him. His emaciatedoung face, disfigured by the half-shaven head, hung downopelessly. At the count's first words he raised it slowly andooked up at him as if wishing to say something or at least to meetis eye. But Rostopchin did not look at him. A vein in the young man'song thin neck swelled like a cord and went blue behind the ear, anduddenly his face flushed.
	All eyes were fixed on him. He looked at the crowd, and renderedore hopeful by the expression he read on the faces there, he smiledadly and timidly, and lowering his head shifted his feet on the step.
	"He has betrayed his Tsar and his country, he had gone over toonaparte. He alone of all the Russians has disgraced the Russianame, he has caused Moscow to perish," said Rostopchin in a sharp,ven voice, but suddenly he glanced down at Vereshchagin who continuedo stand in the same submissive attitude. As if inflamed by the sight,e raised his arm and addressed the people, almost shouting:
	"Deal with him as you think fit! I hand him over to you."
	The crowd remained silent and only pressed closer and closer tone another. To keep one another back, to breathe in that stiflingtmosphere, to be unable to stir, and to await something unknown,ncomprehended, and terrible, was becoming unbearable. Thosetanding in front, who had seen and heard what had taken placeefore them, all stood with wide open eyes and mouths, strainingith all their strength, and held back the crowd that was pushingehind them.
	"Beat him!... Let the traitor perish and not disgrace the Russianame!" shouted Rostopchin. "Cut him down. I command it."
	Hearing not so much the words as the angry tone of Rostopchin'soice, the crowd moaned and heaved forward, but again paused.
	"Count!" exclaimed the timid yet theatrical voice of Vereshchagin inhe midst of the momentary silence that ensued, "Count! One God isbove us both...." He lifted his head and again the thick vein inis thin neck filled with blood and the color rapidly came and went inis face.
	He did not finish what he wished to say.
	"Cut him down! I command it..." shouted Rostopchin, suddenly growingale like Vereshchagin.
	"Draw sabers!" cried the dragoon officer, drawing his own.
	Another still stronger wave flowed through the crowd and reachinghe front ranks carried it swaying to the very steps of the porch. Theall youth, with a stony look on his face, and rigid and uplifted arm,tood beside Vereshchagin.
	"Saber him!" the dragoon officer almost whispered.
	And one of the soldiers, his face all at once distorted with fury,truck Vereshchagin on the head with the blunt side of his saber.
	"Ah!" cried Vereshchagin in meek surprise, looking round with arightened glance as if not understanding why this was done to him. similar moan of surprise and horror ran through the crowd. "O Lord!"xclaimed a sorrowful voice.
	But after the exclamation of surprise that had escaped fromereshchagin he uttered a plaintive cry of pain, and that cry wasatal. The barrier of human feeling, strained to the utmost, thatad held the crowd in check suddenly broke. The crime had begun andust now be completed. The plaintive moan of reproach was drowned byhe threatening and angry roar of the crowd. Like the seventh and lastave that shatters a ship, that last irresistible wave burst fromhe rear and reached the front ranks, carrying them off their feet andngulfing them all. The dragoon was about to repeat his blow.ereshchagin with a cry of horror, covering his head with his hands,ushed toward the crowd. The tall youth, against whom he stumbled,eized his thin neck with his hands and, yelling wildly, fell with himnder the feet of the pressing, struggling crowd.
	Some beat and tore at Vereshchagin, others at the tall youth. Andhe screams of those that were being trampled on and of those whoried to rescue the tall lad only increased the fury of the crowd.t was a long time before the dragoons could extricate the bleedingouth, beaten almost to death. And for a long time, despite theeverish haste with which the mob tried to end the work that hadeen begun, those who were hitting, throttling, and tearing atereshchagin were unable to kill him, for the crowd pressed from allides, swaying as one mass with them in the center and rendering itmpossible for them either to kill him or let him go.
	"Hit him with an ax, eh!... Crushed?... Traitor, he soldhrist.... Still alive... tenacious... serves him right! Tortureerves a thief right. Use the hatchet!... What- still alive?"
	Only when the victim ceased to struggle and his cries changed to aong-drawn, measured death rattle did the crowd around hisrostrate, bleeding corpse begin rapidly to change places. Each oneame up, glanced at what had been done, and with horror, reproach, andstonishment pushed back again.
	"O Lord! The people are like wild beasts! How could he be alive?"oices in the crowd could be heard saying. "Quite a young fellowoo... must have been a merchant's son. What men!... and they say he'sot the right one.... How not the right one?... O Lord! And there'snother has been beaten too- they say he's nearly done for.... Oh, theeople... Aren't they afraid of sinning?..." said the same mob now,ooking with pained distress at the dead body with its long, thin,alf-severed neck and its livid face stained with blood and dust.
	A painstaking police officer, considering the presence of a corpsen his excellency's courtyard unseemly, told the dragoons to take itway. Two dragoons took it by its distorted legs and dragged itlong the ground. The gory, dust-stained, half-shaven head with itsong neck trailed twisting along the ground. The crowd shrank backrom it.
	At the moment when Vereshchagin fell and the crowd closed in withavage yells and swayed about him, Rostopchin suddenly turned palend, instead of going to the back entrance where his carriagewaited him, went with hurried steps and bent head, not knowinghere and why, along the passage leading to the rooms on the groundloor. The count's face was white and he could not control theeverish twitching of his lower jaw.
	"This way, your excellency... Where are you going?... This way,lease..." said a trembling, frightened voice behind him.
	Count Rostopchin was unable to reply and, turning obediently, wentn the direction indicated. At the back entrance stood his caleche.he distant roar of the yelling crowd was audible even there. Heastily took his seat and told the coachman to drive him to hisountry house in Sokolniki.
	When they reached the Myasnitski Street and could no longer hear thehouts of the mob, the count began to repent. He remembered withissatisfaction the agitation and fear he had betrayed before hisubordinates. "The mob is terrible- disgusting," he said to himself inrench. "They are like wolves whom nothing but flesh can appease."Count! One God is above us both!"- Vereshchagin's words suddenlyecurred to him, and a disagreeable shiver ran down his back. But thisas only a momentary feeling and Count Rostopchin smiledisdainfully at himself. "I had other duties," thought he. "The peoplead to be appeased. Many other victims have perished and are perishingor the public good"- and he began thinking of his social duties tois family and to the city entrusted to him, and of himself- notimself as Theodore Vasilyevich Rostopchin (he fancied that Theodoreasilyevich Rostopchin was sacrificing himself for the public good)ut himself as governor, the representative of authority and of thesar. "Had I been simply Theodore Vasilyevich my course of actionould have been quite different, but it was my duty to safeguard myife and dignity as commander in chief."
	Lightly swaying on the flexible springs of his carriage and noonger hearing the terrible sounds of the crowd, Rostopchin grewhysically calm and, as always happens, as soon as he becamehysically tranquil his mind devised reasons why he should be mentallyranquil too. The thought which tranquillized Rostopchin was not a newne. Since the world began and men have killed one another no oneas ever committed such a crime against his fellow man withoutomforting himself with this same idea. This idea is le bien public,he hypothetical welfare of other people.
	To a man not swayed by passion that welfare is never certain, but heho commits such a crime always knows just where that welfare lies.nd Rostopchin now knew it.
	Not only did his reason not reproach him for what he had done, bute even found cause for self-satisfaction in having so successfullyontrived to avail himself of a convenient opportunity to punish ariminal and at the same time pacify the mob.
	"Vereshchagin was tried and condemned to death," thoughtostopchin (though the Senate had only condemned Vereshchagin toard labor), "he was a traitor and a spy. I could not let him gonpunished and so I have killed two birds with one stone: to appeasehe mob I gave them a victim and at the same time punished aiscreant."
	Having reached his country house and begun to give orders aboutomestic arrangements, the count grew quite tranquil.
	Half an hour later he was driving with his fast horses across theokolniki field, no longer thinking of what had occurred butonsidering what was to come. He was driving to the Yauza bridge wheree had heard that Kutuzov was. Count Rostopchin was mentally preparinghe angry and stinging reproaches he meant to address to Kutuzov foris deception. He would make that foxy old courtier feel that theesponsibility for all the calamities that would follow thebandonment of the city and the ruin of Russia (as Rostopchin regardedt) would fall upon his doting old head. Planning beforehand what heould say to Kutuzov, Rostopchin turned angrily in his caleche andazed sternly from side to side.
	The Sokolniki field was deserted. Only at the end of it, in front ofhe almshouse and the lunatic asylum, could be seen some people inhite and others like them walking singly across the field shoutingnd gesticulating.
	One of these was running to cross the path of Count Rostopchin'sarriage, and the count himself, his coachman, and his dragoons lookedith vague horror and curiosity at these released lunatics andspecially at the one running toward them.
	Swaying from side to side on his long, thin legs in his flutteringressing gown, this lunatic was running impetuously, his gaze fixed onostopchin, shouting something in a hoarse voice and making signs toim to stop. The lunatic's solemn, gloomy face was thin and yellow,ith its beard growing in uneven tufts. His black, agate pupils withaffron-yellow whites moved restlessly near the lower eyelids.
	"Stop! Pull up, I tell you!" he cried in a piercing voice, and againhouted something breathlessly with emphatic intonations and gestures.
	Coming abreast of the caleche he ran beside it.
	"Thrice have they slain me, thrice have I risen from the dead.hey stoned me, crucified me... I shall rise... shall rise... shallise. They have torn my body. The kingdom of God will be overthrown...hrice will I overthrow it and thrice re-establish it!" he cried,aising his voice higher and higher.
	Count Rostopchin suddenly grew pale as he had done when the crowdlosed in on Vereshchagin. He turned away. "Go fas... faster!" heried in a trembling voice to his coachman. The caleche flew overhe ground as fast as the horses could draw it, but for a long timeount Rostopchin still heard the insane despairing screams growingainter in the distance, while his eyes saw nothing but thestonished, frightened, bloodstained face of "the traitor" in theur-lined coat.
	Recent as that mental picture was, Rostopchin already felt that itad cut deep into his heart and drawn blood. Even now he feltlearly that the gory trace of that recollection would not pass withime, but that the terrible memory would, on the contrary, dwell inis heart ever more cruelly and painfully to the end of his life. Heeemed still to hear the sound of his own words: "Cut him down! Iommand it...."
	"Why did I utter those words? It was by some accident I saidhem.... I need not have said them," he thought. "And then nothingould have happened." He saw the frightened and then infuriated facef the dragoon who dealt the blow, the look of silent, timideproach that boy in the fur-lined coat had turned upon him. "But Iid not do it for my own sake. I was bound to act that way.... Theob, the traitor... the public welfare," thought he.
	Troops were still crowding at the Yauza bridge. It was hot. Kutuzov,ejected and frowning, sat on a bench by the bridge toying with hiship in the sand when a caleche dashed up noisily. A man in aeneral's uniform with plumes in his hat went up to Kutuzov and saidomething in French. It was Count Rostopchin. He told Kutuzov thate had come because Moscow, the capital, was no more and only the armyemained.
	"Things would have been different if your Serene Highness had notold me that you would not abandon Moscow without another battle;ll this would not have happened," he said.
	Kutuzov looked at Rostopchin as if, not grasping what was said toim, he was trying to read something peculiar written at that momentn the face of the man addressing him. Rostopchin grew confused andecame silent. Kutuzov slightly shook his head and not taking hisenetrating gaze from Rostopchin's face muttered softly:
	"No! I shall not give up Moscow without a battle!"
	Whether Kutuzov was thinking of something entirely different when hepoke those words, or uttered them purposely, knowing them to beeaningless, at any rate Rostopchin made no reply and hastily leftim. And strange to say, the Governor of Moscow, the proud Countostopchin, took up a Cossack whip and went to the bridge where heegan with shouts to drive on the carts that blocked the way.BK11|CH26
	CHAPTER XXVI
	Toward four o'clock in the afternoon Murat's troops were enteringoscow. In front rode a detachment of Wurttemberg hussars and behindhem rode the King of Naples himself accompanied by a numerous suite.
	About the middle of the Arbat Street, near the Church of theiraculous Icon of St. Nicholas, Murat halted to await news from thedvanced detachment as to the condition in which they had found theitadel, le Kremlin.
	Around Murat gathered a group of those who had remained in Moscow.hey all stared in timid bewilderment at the strange, long-hairedommander dressed up in feathers and gold.
	"Is that their Tsar himself? He's not bad!" low voices could beeard saying.
	An interpreter rode up to the group.
	"Take off your cap... your caps!" These words went from one tonother in the crowd. The interpreter addressed an old porter andsked if it was far to the Kremlin. The porter, listening inerplexity to the unfamiliar Polish accent and not realizing thathe interpreter was speaking Russian, did not understand what waseing said to him and slipped behind the others.
	Murat approached the interpreter and told him to ask where theussian army was. One of the Russians understood what was asked andeveral voices at once began answering the interpreter. A Frenchfficer, returning from the advanced detachment, rode up to Muratnd reported that the gates of the citadel had been barricaded andhat there was probably an ambuscade there.
	"Good!" said Murat and, turning to one of the gentlemen in hisuite, ordered four light guns to be moved forward to fire at theates.
	The guns emerged at a trot from the column following Murat anddvanced up the Arbat. When they reached the end of the Vozdvizhenkatreet they halted and drew in the Square. Several French officersuperintended the placing of the guns and looked at the Kremlinhrough field glasses.
	The bells in the Kremlin were ringing for vespers, and this soundroubled the French. They imagined it to be a call to arms. A fewnfantrymen ran to the Kutafyev Gate. Beams and wooden screens hadeen put there, and two musket shots rang out from under the gate asoon as an officer and men began to run toward it. A general who wastanding by the guns shouted some words of command to the officer, andhe latter ran back again with his men.
	The sound of three more shots came from the gate.
	One shot struck a French soldier's foot, and from behind the screensame the strange sound of a few voices shouting. Instantly as at aord of command the expression of cheerful serenity on the faces ofhe French general, officers, and men changed to one of determinedoncentrated readiness for strife and suffering. To all of them fromhe marshal to the least soldier, that place was not the Vozdvizhenka,okhavaya, or Kutafyev Street, nor the Troitsa Gate (places familiarn Moscow), but a new battlefield which would probably proveanguinary. And all made ready for that battle. The cries from theates ceased. The guns were advanced, the artillerymen blew the ashff their linstocks, and an officer gave the word "Fire!" This wasollowed by two whistling sounds of canister shot, one afternother. The shot rattled against the stone of the gate and upon theooden beams and screens, and two wavering clouds of smoke rose overhe Square.
	A few instants after the echo of the reports resounding over thetone-built Kremlin had died away the French heard a strange soundbove their head. Thousands of crows rose above the walls andircled in the air, cawing and noisily flapping their wings.ogether with that sound came a solitary human cry from the gatewaynd amid the smoke appeared the figure of a bareheaded man in aeasant's coat. He grasped a musket and took aim at the French.Fire!" repeated the officer once more, and the reports of a musketnd of two cannon shots were heard simultaneously. The gate againidden by smoke.
	Nothing more stirred behind the screens and the French infantryoldiers and officers advanced to the gate. In the gateway lay threeounded and four dead. Two men in peasant coats ran away at the footf the wall, toward the Znamenka.
	"Clear that away!" said the officer, pointing to the beams and theorpses, and the French soldiers, after dispatching the wounded, threwhe corpses over the parapet.
	Who these men were nobody knew. "Clear that away!" was all thatas said of them, and they were thrown over the parapet and removedater on that they might not stink. Thiers alone dedicates a fewloquent lines to their memory: "These wretches had occupied theacred citadel, having supplied themselves with guns from the arsenal,nd fired" (the wretches) "at the French. Some of them were saberednd the Kremlin was purged of their presence."
	Murat was informed that the way had been cleared. The French enteredhe gates and began pitching their camp in the Senate Square. Out ofhe windows of the Senate House the soldiers threw chairs into thequare for fuel and kindled fires there.
	Other detachments passed through the Kremlin and encamped alonghe Moroseyka, the Lubyanka, and Pokrovka Streets. Others quarteredhemselves along the Vozdvizhenka, the Nikolski, and the Tverskoytreets. No masters of the houses being found anywhere, the Frenchere not billeted on the inhabitants as is usual in towns but lived int as in a camp.
	Though tattered, hungry, worn out, and reduced to a third of theirriginal number, the French entered Moscow in good marching order.t was a weary and famished, but still a fighting and menacing army.ut it remained an army only until its soldiers had dispersed intoheir different lodgings. As soon as the men of the variousegiments began to disperse among the wealthy and deserted houses, thermy was lost forever and there came into being something nondescript,either citizens nor soldiers but what are known as marauders. Whenive weeks later these same men left Moscow, they no longer formedn army. They were a mob of marauders, each carrying a quantity ofrticles which seemed to him valuable or useful. The aim of each manhen he left Moscow was no longer, as it had been, to conquer, buterely to keep what he had acquired. Like a monkey which puts itsaw into the narrow neck of a jug, and having seized a handful of nutsill not open its fist for fear of losing what it holds, and thereforeerishes, the French when they left Moscow had inevitably to perishecause they carried their loot with them, yet to abandon what theyad stolen was as impossible for them as it is for the monkey topen its paw and let go of its nuts. Ten minutes after each regimentad entered a Moscow district, not a soldier or officer was left.en in military uniforms and Hessian boots could be seen through theindows, laughing and walking through the rooms. In cellars andtorerooms similar men were busy among the provisions, and in theards unlocking or breaking open coach house and stable doors,ighting fires in kitchens and kneading and baking bread witholled-up sleeves, and cooking; or frightening, amusing, oraressing women and children. There were many such men both in thehops and houses- but there was no army.
	Order after order was issued by the French commanders that dayorbidding the men to disperse about the town, sternly forbiddingny violence to the inhabitants or any looting, and announcing aoll call for that very evening. But despite all these measures theen, who had till then constituted an army, flowed all over theealthy, deserted city with its comforts and plentiful supplies. As hungry herd of cattle keeps well together when crossing a barrenield, but gets out of hand and at once disperses uncontrollably asoon as it reaches rich pastures, so did the army disperse all overhe wealthy city.
	No residents were left in Moscow, and the soldiers- like waterercolating through sand- spread irresistibly through the city inll directions from the Kremlin into which they had first marched. Theavalry, on entering a merchant's house that had been abandoned andinding there stabling more than sufficient for their horses, went on,ll the same, to the next house which seemed to them better. Many ofhem appropriated several houses, chalked their names on them, anduarreled and even fought with other companies for them. Before theyad had time to secure quarters the soldiers ran out into thetreets to see the city and, hearing that everything had beenbandoned, rushed to places where valuables were to be had for theaking. The officers followed to check the soldiers and werenvoluntarily drawn into doing the same. In Carriage Row carriages hadeen left in the shops, and generals flocked there to selectaleches and coaches for themselves. The few inhabitants who hademained invited commanding officers to their houses, hoping therebyo secure themselves from being plundered. There were masses of wealthnd there seemed no end to it. All around the quarters occupied by therench were other regions still unexplored and unoccupied where,hey thought, yet greater riches might be found. And Moscow engulfedhe army ever deeper and deeper. When water is spilled on dry groundoth the dry ground and the water disappear and mud results; and inhe same way the entry of the famished army into the rich and desertedity resulted in fires and looting and the destruction of both thermy and the wealthy city.
	The French attributed the Fire of Moscow au patriotisme feroce deostopchine,* the Russians to the barbarity of the French. In reality,owever, it was not, and could not be, possible to explain the burningf Moscow by making any individual, or any group of people,esponsible for it. Moscow was burned because it found itself in aosition in which any town built of wood was bound to burn, quitepart from whether it had, or had not, a hundred and thirty inferiorire engines. Deserted Moscow had to burn as inevitably as a heap ofhavings has to burn on which sparks continually fall for severalays. A town built of wood, where scarcely a day passes withoutonflagrations when the house owners are in residence and a policeorce is present, cannot help burning when its inhabitants have leftt and it is occupied by soldiers who smoke pipes, make campfires ofhe Senate chairs in the Senate Square, and cook themselves mealswice a day. In peacetime it is only necessary to billet troops in theillages of any district and the number of fires in that districtmmediately increases. How much then must the probability of fire bencreased in an abandoned, wooden town where foreign troops areuartered. "Le patriotisme feroce de Rostopchine" and the barbarity ofhe French were not to blame in the matter. Moscow was set on firey the soldiers' pipes, kitchens, and campfires, and by thearelessness of enemy soldiers occupying houses they did not own. Evenf there was any arson (which is very doubtful, for no one had anyeason to burn the houses- in any case a troublesome and dangeroushing to do), arson cannot be regarded as the cause, for the samehing would have happened without any incendiarism.
	*To Rostopchin's ferocious patriotism.
	However tempting it might be for the French to blame Rostopchin'serocity and for Russians to blame the scoundrel Bonaparte, or latern to place an heroic torch in the hands of their own people, it ismpossible not to see that there could be no such direct cause ofhe fire, for Moscow had to burn as every village, factory, or houseust burn which is left by its owners and in which strangers arellowed to live and cook their porridge. Moscow was burned by itsnhabitants, it is true, but by those who had abandoned it and noty those who remained in it. Moscow when occupied by the enemy did notemain intact like Berlin, Vienna, and other towns, simply because itsnhabitants abandoned it and did not welcome the French with bread andalt, nor bring them the keys of the city.BK11|CH27
	CHAPTER XXVII
	The absorption of the French by Moscow, radiating starwise as itid, only reached the quarter where Pierre was staying by thevening of the second of September.
	After the last two days spent in solitude and unusual circumstances,ierre was in a state bordering on insanity. He was completelybsessed by one persistent thought. He did not know how or when thishought had taken such possession of him, but he remembered nothing ofhe past, understood nothing of the present, and all he saw andeard appeared to him like a dream.
	He had left home only to escape the intricate tangle of life'semands that enmeshed him, and which in his present condition he wasnable to unravel. He had gone to Joseph Alexeevich's house, on thelea of sorting the deceased's books and papers, only in search ofest from life's turmoil, for in his mind the memory of Josephlexeevich was connected with a world of eternal, solemn, and calmhoughts, quite contrary to the restless confusion into which heelt himself being drawn. He sought a quiet refuge, and in Josephlexeevich's study he really found it. When he sat with his elbowsn the dusty writing table in the deathlike stillness of the study,alm and significant memories of the last few days rose one afternother in his imagination, particularly of the battle of Borodino andf that vague sense of his own insignificance and insincerity comparedith the truth, simplicity, and strength of the class of men heentally classed as they. When Gerasim roused him from his reverie thedea occurred to him of taking part in the popular defense of Moscowhich he knew was projected. And with that object he had asked Gerasimo get him a peasant's coat and a pistol, confiding to him hisntentions of remaining in Joseph Alexeevich's house and keeping hisame secret. Then during the first day spent in inaction andolitude (he tried several times to fix his attention on the Masonicanuscripts, but was unable to do so) the idea that had previouslyccurred to him of the cabalistic significance of his name inonnection with Bonaparte's more than once vaguely presented itself.ut the idea that he, L'russe Besuhof, was destined to set a limito the power of the Beast was as yet only one of the fancies thatften passed through his mind and left no trace behind.
	When, having bought the coat merely with the object of taking partmong the people in the defense of Moscow, Pierre had met theostovs and Natasha had said to him: "Are you remaining inoscow?... How splendid!" the thought flashed into his mind that iteally would be a good thing, even if Moscow were taken, for him toemain there and do what he was predestined to do.
	Next day, with the sole idea of not sparing himself and notagging in any way behind them, Pierre went to the Three Hills gate.ut when he returned to the house convinced that Moscow would not beefended, he suddenly felt that what before had seemed to him merely aossibility had now become absolutely necessary and inevitable. Heust remain in Moscow, concealing his name, and must meet Napoleon andill him, and either perish or put an end to the misery of all Europe-hich it seemed to him was solely due to Napoleon.
	Pierre knew all the details of the attempt on Bonaparte's life in809 by a German student in Vienna, and knew that the student had beenhot. And the risk to which he would expose his life by carrying outis design excited him still more.
	Two equally strong feelings drew Pierre irresistibly to thisurpose. The first was a feeling of the necessity of sacrifice anduffering in view of the common calamity, the same feeling that hadaused him to go to Mozhaysk on the twenty-fifth and to make his wayo the very thick of the battle and had now caused him to run awayrom his home and, in place of the luxury and comfort to which heas accustomed, to sleep on a hard sofa without undressing and eat theame food as Gerasim. The other was that vague and quite Russianeeling of contempt for everything conventional, artificial, anduman- for everything the majority of men regard as the greatestood in the world. Pierre had first experienced this strange andascinating feeling at the Sloboda Palace, when he had suddenly felthat wealth, power, and life- all that men so painstakingly acquirend guard- if it has any worth has so only by reason the joy withhich it can all be renounced.
	It was the feeling that induces a volunteer recruit to spend hisast penny on drink, and a drunken man to smash mirrors or glasses foro apparent reason and knowing that it will cost him all the moneye possesses: the feeling which causes a man to perform actionshich from an ordinary point of view are insane, to test, as itere, his personal power and strength, affirming the existence of aigher, nonhuman criterion of life.
	From the very day Pierre had experienced this feeling for theirst time at the Sloboda Palace he had been continuously under itsnfluence, but only now found full satisfaction for it. Moreover, athis moment Pierre was supported in his design and prevented fromenouncing it by what he had already done in that direction. If heere now to leave Moscow like everyone else, his flight from home, theeasant coat, the pistol, and his announcement to the Rostovs thate would remain in Moscow would all become not merely meaninglessut contemptible and ridiculous, and to this Pierre was veryensitive.
	Pierre's physical condition, as is always the case, correspondedo his mental state. The unaccustomed coarse food, the vodka herank during those days, the absence of wine and cigars, his dirtynchanged linen, two almost sleepless nights passed on a short sofaithout bedding- all this kept him in a state of excitementordering on insanity.
	It was two o'clock in the afternoon. The French had alreadyntered Moscow. Pierre knew this, but instead of acting he onlyhought about his undertaking, going over its minutest details inis mind. In his fancy he did not clearly picture to himself eitherhe striking of the blow or the death of Napoleon, but withxtraordinary vividness and melancholy enjoyment imagined his ownestruction and heroic endurance.
	"Yes, alone, for the sake of all, I must do it or perish!" hehought. "Yes, I will approach... and then suddenly... with pistolr dagger? But that is all the same! 'It is not I but the hand ofrovidence that punishes thee,' I shall say," thought he, imagininghat he would say when killing Napoleon. "Well then, take me andxecute me!" he went on, speaking to himself and bowing his headith a sad but firm expression.
	While Pierre, standing in the middle of the room, was talking toimself in this way, the study door opened and on the thresholdppeared the figure of Makar Alexeevich, always so timid before butow quite transformed.
	His dressing gown was unfastened, his face red and distorted. He wasbviously drunk. On seeing Pierre he grew confused at first, butoticing embarrassment on Pierre's face immediately grew bold and,taggering on his thin legs, advanced into the middle of the room.
	"They're frightened," he said confidentially in a hoarse voice. "Iay I won't surrender, I say... Am I not right, sir?"
	He paused and then suddenly seeing the pistol on the table seized itith unexpected rapidity and ran out into the corridor.
	Gerasim and the porter, who had followed Makar Alexeevich, stoppedim in the vestibule and tried to take the pistol from him. Pierre,oming out into the corridor, looked with pity and repulsion at thealf-crazy old man. Makar Alexeevich, frowning with exertion, heldn to the pistol and screamed hoarsely, evidently with some heroicancy in his head.
	"To arms! Board them! No, you shan't get it," he yelled.
	"That will do, please, that will do. Have the goodness- please, sir,o let go! Please, sir..." pleaded Gerasim, trying carefully toteer Makar Alexeevich by the elbows back to the door.
	"Who are you? Bonaparte!..." shouted Makar Alexeevich.
	"That's not right, sir. Come to your room, please, and rest. Allowe to have the pistol."
	"Be off, thou base slave! Touch me not! See this?" shouted Makarlexeevich, brandishing the pistol. "Board them!"
	"Catch hold!" whispered Gerasim to the porter.
	They seized Makar Alexeevich by the arms and dragged him to theoor.
	The vestibule was filled with the discordant sounds of a strugglend of a tipsy, hoarse voice.
	Suddenly a fresh sound, a piercing feminine scream, reverberatedrom the porch and the cook came running into the vestibule.
	"It's them! Gracious heavens! O Lord, four of them, horsemen!" sheried.
	Gerasim and the porter let Makar Alexeevich go, and in the nowilent corridor the sound of several hands knocking at the frontoor could be heard.BK11|CH28
	CHAPTER XXVIII
	Pierre, having decided that until he had carried out his design heould disclose neither his identity nor his knowledge of French, stoodt the half-open door of the corridor, intending to conceal himself asoon as the French entered. But the French entered and still Pierreid not retire- an irresistible curiosity kept him there.
	There were two of them. One was an officer- a tall, soldierly,andsome man- the other evidently a private or an orderly,unburned, short, and thin, with sunken cheeks and a dullxpression. The officer walked in front, leaning on a stick andlightly limping. When he had advanced a few steps he stopped,aving apparently decided that these were good quarters, turnedound to the soldiers standing at the entrance, and in a loud voice ofommand ordered them to put up the horses. Having done that, thefficer, lifting his elbow with a smart gesture, stroked hisustache and lightly touched his hat.
	"Bonjour, la compagnie!"* said he gaily, smiling and looking aboutim.
	*"Good day, everybody!"
	No one gave any reply.
	"Vous etes le bourgeois?"* the officer asked Gerasim.
	*"Are you the master here?"
	Gerasim gazed at the officer with an alarmed and inquiring look.
	"Quartier, quartier, logement!" said the officer, looking down athe little man with a condescending and good-natured smile. "Lesrancais sont de bons enfants. Que diable! Voyons! Ne nous fachonsas, mon vieux!"* added he, clapping the scared and silent Gerasimn the shoulder. "Well, does no one speak French in thisstablishment?" he asked again in French, looking around and meetingierre's eyes. Pierre moved away from the door.
	*"Quarters, quarters, lodgings! The French are good fellows. Whathe devil! There, don't let us be cross, old fellow!"
	Again the officer turned to Gerasim and asked him to show him theooms in the house.
	"Master, not here- don't understand... me, you..." said Gerasim,rying to render his words more comprehensible by contorting them.
	Still smiling, the French officer spread out his hands beforeerasim's nose, intimating that he did not understand him either,nd moved, limping, to the door at which Pierre was standing. Pierreished to go away and conceal himself, but at that moment he saw Makarlexeevich appearing at the open kitchen door with the pistol in hisand. With a madman's cunning, Makar Alexeevich eyed the Frenchman,aised his pistol, and took aim.
	"Board them!" yelled the tipsy man, trying to press the trigger.earing the yell the officer turned round, and at the same momentierre threw himself on the drunkard. Just when Pierre snatched at andtruck up the pistol Makar Alexeevich at last got his fingers on therigger, there was a deafening report, and all were enveloped in aloud of smoke. The Frenchman turned pale and rushed to the door.
	Forgetting his intention of concealing his knowledge of French,ierre, snatching away the pistol and throwing it down, ran up tohe officer and addressed him in French.
	"You are not wounded?" he asked.
	"I think not," answered the Frenchman, feeling himself over. "But have had a lucky escape this time," he added, pointing to theamaged plaster of the wall. "Who is that man?" said he, lookingternly at Pierre.
	"Oh, I am really in despair at what has occurred," said Pierreapidly, quite forgetting the part he had intended to play. "He isn unfortunate madman who did not know what he was doing."
	The officer went up to Makar Alexeevich and took him by the collar.
	Makar Alexeevich was standing with parted lips, swaying, as if abouto fall asleep, as he leaned against the wall.
	"Brigand! You shall pay for this," said the Frenchman, letting go ofim. "We French are merciful after victory, but we do not pardonraitors," he added, with a look of gloomy dignity and a finenergetic gesture.
	Pierre continued, in French, to persuade the officer not to holdhat drunken imbecile to account. The Frenchman listened in silenceith the same gloomy expression, but suddenly turned to Pierre with smile. For a few seconds he looked at him in silence. His handsomeace assumed a melodramatically gentle expression and he held outis hand.
	"You have saved my life. You are French," said he.
	For a Frenchman that deduction was indubitable. Only a Frenchmanould perform a great deed, and to save his life- the life of M.amballe, captain of the 13th Light Regiment- was undoubtedly a veryreat deed.
	But however indubitable that conclusion and the officer's convictionased upon it, Pierre felt it necessary to disillusion him.
	"I am Russian," he said quickly.
	"Tut, tut, tut! Tell that to others," said the officer, waving hisinger before his nose and smiling. "You shall tell me all abouthat presently. I am delighted to meet a compatriot. Well, and whatre we to do with this man?" he added, addressing himself to Pierre aso a brother.
	Even if Pierre were not a Frenchman, having once received thatoftiest of human appellations he could not renounce it, said thefficer's look and tone. In reply to his last question Pierre againxplained who Makar Alexeevich was and how just before their arrivalhat drunken imbecile had seized the loaded pistol which they hadot had time to recover from him, and begged the officer to let theeed go unpunished.
	The Frenchman expanded his chest and made a majestic gesture withis arm.
	"You have saved my life! You are French. You ask his pardon? I grantt you. Lead that man away!" said he quickly and energetically, andaking the arm of Pierre whom he had promoted to be a Frenchman foraving his life, he went with him into the room.
	The soldiers in the yard, hearing the shot, came into the passagesking what had happened, and expressed their readiness to punishhe culprits, but the officer sternly checked them.
	"You will be called in when you are wanted," he said.
	The soldiers went out again, and the orderly, who had meanwhilead time to visit the kitchen, came up to his officer.
	"Captain, there is soup and a leg of mutton in the kitchen," saide. "Shall I serve them up?"
	"Yes, and some wine," answered the captain.BK11|CH29
	CHAPTER XXIX
	When the French officer went into the room with Pierre the lattergain thought it his duty to assure him that he was not French andished to go away, but the officer would not hear of it. He was soery polite, amiable, good-natured, and genuinely grateful to Pierreor saving his life that Pierre had not the heart to refuse, and satown with him in the parlor- the first room they entered. Toierre's assurances that he was not a Frenchman, the captain,vidently not understanding how anyone could decline so flatteringn appellation, shrugged his shoulders and said that if Pierrebsolutely insisted on passing for a Russian let it be so, but for allhat he would be forever bound to Pierre by gratitude for saving hisife.
	Had this man been endowed with the slightest capacity for perceivinghe feelings of others, and had he at all understood what Pierre'seelings were, the latter would probably have left him, but thean's animated obtuseness to everything other than himself disarmedierre.
	"A Frenchman or a Russian prince incognito," said the officer,ooking at Pierre's fine though dirty linen and at the ring on hisinger. "I owe my life to you and offer you my friendship. A Frenchmanever forgets either an insult or a service. I offer you myriendship. That is all I can say."
	There was so much good nature and nobility (in the French sense ofhe word) in the officer's voice, in the expression of his face and inis gestures, that Pierre, unconsciously smiling in response to therenchman's smile, pressed the hand held out to him.
	"Captain Ramballe, of the 13th Light Regiment, Chevalier of theegion of Honor for the affair on the seventh of September," hentroduced himself, a self-satisfied irrepressible smile puckering hisips under his mustache. "Will you now be so good as to tell me withhom I have the honor of conversing so pleasantly, instead of being inhe ambulance with that maniac's bullet in my body?"
	Pierre replied that he could not tell him his name and, blushing,egan to try to invent a name and to say something about his reasonor concealing it, but the Frenchman hastily interrupted him.
	"Oh, please!" said he. "I understand your reasons. You are anfficer... a superior officer perhaps. You have borne arms against us.hat's not my business. I owe you my life. That is enough for me. I amuite at your service. You belong to the gentry?" he concluded with shade of inquiry in his tone. Pierre bent his head. "Youraptismal name, if you please. That is all I ask. Monsieur Pierre, youay.... That's all I want to know."
	When the mutton and an omelet had been served and a samovar andodka brought, with some wine which the French had taken from aussian cellar and brought with them, Ramballe invited Pierre to shareis dinner, and himself began to eat greedily and quickly like aealthy and hungry man, munching his food rapidly with his strongeeth, continually smacking his lips, and repeating- "Excellent!elicious!" His face grew red and was covered with perspiration.ierre was hungry and shared the dinner with pleasure. Morel, therderly, brought some hot water in a saucepan and placed a bottle oflaret in it. He also brought a bottle of kvass, taken from theitchen for them to try. That beverage was already known to the Frenchnd had been given a special name. They called it limonade de cochonpig's lemonade), and Morel spoke well of the limonade de cochon head found in the kitchen. But as the captain had the wine they hadaken while passing through Moscow, he left the kvass to Morel andpplied himself to the bottle of Bordeaux. He wrapped the bottle up tots neck in a table napkin and poured out wine for himself and forierre. The satisfaction of his hunger and the wine rendered theaptain still more lively and he chatted incessantly all throughinner.
	"Yes, my dear Monsieur Pierre, I owe you a fine votive candle foraving me from that maniac.... You see, I have bullets enough in myody already. Here is one I got at Wagram" (he touched his side)and a second at Smolensk"- he showed a scar on his cheek- "and thiseg which as you see does not want to march, I got that on the seventht the great battle of la Moskowa. Sacre Dieu! It was splendid! Thateluge of fire was worth seeing. It was a tough job you set ushere, my word! You may be proud of it! And on my honor, in spite ofhe cough I caught there, I should be ready to begin again. I pityhose who did not see it."
	"I was there," said Pierre.
	"Bah, really? So much the better! You are certainly brave foes.he great redoubt held out well, by my pipe!" continued the Frenchman.And you made us pay dear for it. I was at it three times- sure as Iit here. Three times we reached the guns and three times we werehrown back like cardboard figures. Oh, it was beautiful, Monsieurierre! Your grenadiers were splendid, by heaven! I saw them closep their ranks six times in succession and march as if on parade. Fineellows! Our King of Naples, who knows what's what, cried 'Bravo!' Ha,a! So you are one of us soldiers!" he added, smiling, after aomentary pause. "So much the better, so much the better, Monsieurierre! Terrible in battle... gallant... with the fair" (he winked andmiled), "that's what the French are, Monsieur Pierre, aren't they?"
	The captain was so naively and good-humoredly gay, so real, and soleased with himself that Pierre almost winked back as he lookederrily at him. Probably the word "gallant" turned the captain'shoughts to the state of Moscow.
	"Apropos, tell me please, is it true that the women have all leftoscow? What a queer idea! What had they to be afraid of?"
	"Would not the French ladies leave Paris if the Russians enteredt?" asked Pierre.
	"Ha, ha, ha!" The Frenchman emitted a merry, sanguine chuckle,atting Pierre on the shoulder. "What a thing to say!" he exclaimed.Paris?... But Paris, Paris..."
	"Paris- the capital of the world," Pierre finished his remark forim.
	The captain looked at Pierre. He had a habit of stopping short inhe middle of his talk and gazing intently with his laughing, kindlyyes.
	"Well, if you hadn't told me you were Russian, I should have wageredhat you were Parisian! You have that... I don't know what, that..."nd having uttered this compliment, he again gazed at him in silence.
	"I have been in Paris. I spent years there," said Pierre.
	"Oh yes, one sees that plainly. Paris!... A man who doesn't knowaris is a savage. You can tell a Parisian two leagues off. Paris isalma, la Duchenois, Potier, the Sorbonne, the boulevards," andoticing that his conclusion was weaker than what had gone before,e added quickly: "There is only one Paris in the world. You have beeno Paris and have remained Russian. Well, I don't esteem you theess for it."
	Under the influence of the wine he had drunk, and after the dayse had spent alone with his depressing thoughts, Pierrenvoluntarily enjoyed talking with this cheerful and good-natured man.
	"To return to your ladies- I hear they are lovely. What a wretcheddea to go and bury themselves in the steppes when the French armys in Moscow. What a chance those girls have missed! Your peasants,ow- that's another thing; but you civilized people, you ought to knows better than that. We took Vienna, Berlin, Madrid, Naples, Rome,arsaw, all the world's capitals.... We are feared, but we areoved. We are nice to know. And then the Emperor..." he began, butierre interrupted him.
	"The Emperor," Pierre repeated, and his face suddenly became sad andmbarrassed, "is the Emperor...?"
	"The Emperor? He is generosity, mercy, justice, order, genius-hat's what the Emperor is! It is I, Ramballe, who tell you so.... Issure you I was his enemy eight years ago. My father was anmigrant count.... But that man has vanquished me. He has taken holdf me. I could not resist the sight of the grandeur and glory withhich he has covered France. When I understood what he wanted- when saw that he was preparing a bed of laurels for us, you know, Iaid to myself: 'That is a monarch,' and I devoted myself to him! Sohere! Oh yes, mon cher, he is the greatest man of the ages past oruture."
	"Is he in Moscow?" Pierre stammered with a guilty look.
	The Frenchman looked at his guilty face and smiled.
	"No, he will make his entry tomorrow," he replied, and continued hisalk.
	Their conversation was interrupted by the cries of several voices athe gate and by Morel, who came to say that some Wurttemberg hussarsad come and wanted to put up their horses in the yard where theaptain's horses were. This difficulty had arisen chiefly becausehe hussars did not understand what was said to them in French.
	The captain had their senior sergeant called in, and in a sternoice asked him to what regiment he belonged, who was his commandingfficer, and by what right he allowed himself to claim quarters thatere already occupied. The German who knew little French, answered thewo first questions by giving the names of his regiment and of hisommanding officer, but in reply to the third question which he didot understand said, introducing broken French into his own German,hat he was the quartermaster of the regiment and his commander hadrdered him to occupy all the houses one after another. Pierre, whonew German, translated what the German said to the captain and gavehe captain's reply to the Wurttemberg hussar in German. When he hadnderstood what was said to him, the German submitted and took his menlsewhere. The captain went out into the porch and gave some orders in loud voice.
	When he returned to the room Pierre was sitting in the same place asefore, with his head in his hands. His face expressed suffering. Heeally was suffering at that moment. When the captain went out ande was left alone, suddenly he came to himself and realized theosition he was in. It was not that Moscow had been taken or thathe happy conquerors were masters in it and were patronizing him.ainful as that was it was not that which tormented Pierre at theoment. He was tormented by the consciousness of his own weakness. Theew glasses of wine he had drunk and the conversation with thisood-natured man had destroyed the mood of concentrated gloom in whiche had spent the last few days and which was essential for thexecution of his design. The pistol, dagger, and peasant coat wereeady. Napoleon was to enter the town next day. Pierre stillonsidered that it would be a useful and worthy action to slay thevildoer, but now he felt that he would not do it. He did not knowhy, but he felt a foreboding that he would not carry out hisntention. He struggled against the confession of his weakness butimly felt that he could not overcome it and that his former gloomyrame of mind, concerning vengeance, killing, and self-sacrifice,ad been dispersed like dust by contact with the first man he met.
	The captain returned to the room, limping slightly and whistling aune.
	The Frenchman's chatter which had previously amused Pierre nowepelled him. The tune he was whistling, his gait, and the gestureith which he twirled his mustache, all now seemed offensive. "Iill go away immediately. I won't say another word to him," thoughtierre. He thought this, but still sat in the same place. A strangeeeling of weakness tied him to the spot; he wished to get up and goway, but could not do so.
	The captain, on the other hand, seemed very cheerful. He paced upnd down the room twice. His eyes shone and his mustache twitched asf he were smiling to himself at some amusing thought.
	"The colonel of those Wurttembergers is delightful," he suddenlyaid. "He's a German, but a nice fellow all the same.... But he's aerman." He sat down facing Pierre. "By the way, you know German,hen?"
	Pierre looked at him in silence.
	"What is the German for 'shelter'?"
	"Shelter?" Pierre repeated. "The German for shelter is Unterkunft."
	"How do you say it?" the captain asked quickly and doubtfully.
	"Unterkunft," Pierre repeated.
	"Onterkoff," said the captain and looked at Pierre for someeconds with laughing eyes. "These Germans are first-rate fools, don'tou think so, Monsieur Pierre?" he concluded.
	"Well, let's have another bottle of this Moscow Bordeaux, shalle? Morel will warm us up another little bottle. Morel!" he called outaily.
	Morel brought candles and a bottle of wine. The captain looked atierre by the candlelight and was evidently struck by the troubledxpression on his companion's face. Ramballe, with genuine distressnd sympathy in his face, went up to Pierre and bent over him.
	"There now, we're sad," said he, touching Pierre's hand. "Have Ipset you? No, really, have you anything against me?" he asked Pierre.Perhaps it's the state of affairs?"
	Pierre did not answer, but looked cordially into the Frenchman'syes whose expression of sympathy was pleasing to him.
	"Honestly, without speaking of what I owe you, I feel friendship forou. Can I do anything for you? Dispose of me. It is for life andeath. I say it with my hand on my heart!" said he, striking hishest.
	"Thank you," said Pierre.
	The captain gazed intently at him as he had done when he learnedhat "shelter" was Unterkunft in German, and his face suddenlyrightened.
	"Well, in that case, I drink to our friendship!" he cried gaily,illing two glasses with wine.
	Pierre took one of the glasses and emptied it. Ramballe emptiedis too, again pressed Pierre's hand, and leaned his elbows on theable in a pensive attitude.
	"Yes, my dear friend," he began, "such is fortune's caprice. Whoould have said that I should be a soldier and a captain of dragoonsn the service of Bonaparte, as we used to call him? Yet here I amn Moscow with him. I must tell you, mon cher," he continued in thead and measured tones of a man who intends to tell a long story,that our name is one of the most ancient in France."
	And with a Frenchman's easy and naive frankness the captain toldierre the story of his ancestors, his childhood, youth, andanhood, and all about his relations and his financial and familyffairs, "ma pauvre mere" playing of course an important part in thetory.
	"But all that is only life's setting, the real thing is love-ove! Am I not right, Monsieur Pierre?" said he, growing animated.Another glass?"
	Pierre again emptied his glass and poured himself out a third.
	"Oh, women, women!" and the captain, looking with glistening eyes atierre, began talking of love and of his love affairs.
	There were very many of these, as one could easily believe,ooking at the officer's handsome, self-satisfied face, and noting theager enthusiasm with which he spoke of women. Though all Ramballe'sove stories had the sensual character which Frenchmen regard as thepecial charm and poetry of love, yet he told his story with suchincere conviction that he alone had experienced and known all theharm of love and he described women so alluringly that Pierreistened to him with curiosity.
	It was plain that l'amour which the Frenchman was so fond of was nothat low and simple kind that Pierre had once felt for his wife, noras it the romantic love stimulated by himself that he experienced foratasha. (Ramballe despised both these kinds of love equally: thene he considered the "love of clodhoppers" and the other the "love ofimpletons.") L'amour which the Frenchman worshiped consistedrincipally in the unnaturalness of his relation to the woman and in aombination of incongruities giving the chief charm to the feeling.
	Thus the captain touchingly recounted the story of his love for aascinating marquise of thirty-five and at the same time for aharming, innocent child of seventeen, daughter of the bewitchingarquise. The conflict of magnanimity between the mother and theaughter, ending in the mother's sacrificing herself and offeringer daughter in marriage to her lover, even now agitated theaptain, though it was the memory of a distant past. Then he recountedn episode in which the husband played the part of the lover, ande- the lover- assumed the role of the husband, as well as severalroll incidents from his recollections of Germany, where "shelter"s called Unterkunft and where the husbands eat sauerkraut and theoung girls are "too blonde."
	Finally, the latest episode in Poland still fresh in the captain'semory, and which he narrated with rapid gestures and glowing face,as of how he had saved the life of a Pole (in general, the savingf life continually occurred in the captain's stories) and the Polead entrusted to him his enchanting wife (parisienne de coeur) whileimself entering the French service. The captain was happy, thenchanting Polish lady wished to elope with him, but, prompted byagnanimity, the captain restored the wife to the husband, saying ase did so: "I have saved your life, and I save your honor!" Havingepeated these words the captain wiped his eyes and gave himself ahake, as if driving away the weakness which assailed him at thisouching recollection.
	Listening to the captain's tales, Pierre- as often happens late inhe evening and under the influence of wine- followed all that wasold him, understood it all, and at the same time followed a trainf personal memories which, he knew not why, suddenly arose in hisind. While listening to these love stories his own love for Natashanexpectedly rose to his mind, and going over the pictures of thatove in his imagination he mentally compared them with Ramballe'sales. Listening to the story of the struggle between love and duty,ierre saw before his eyes every minutest detail of his last meetingith the object of his love at the Sukharev water tower. At the timef that meeting it had not produced an effect upon him- he had notven once recalled it. But now it seemed to him that that meetingad had in it something very important and poetic.
	"Peter Kirilovich, come here! We have recognized you," he now seemedo hear the words she had uttered and to see before him her eyes,er smile, her traveling hood, and a stray lock of her hair... andhere seemed to him something pathetic and touching in all this.
	Having finished his tale about the enchanting Polish lady, theaptain asked Pierre if he had ever experienced a similar impulse toacrifice himself for love and a feeling of envy of the legitimateusband.
	Challenged by this question Pierre raised his head and felt a needo express the thoughts that filled his mind. He began to explain thate understood love for a women somewhat differently. He said that inll his life he had loved and still loved only one woman, and that sheould never be his.
	"Tiens!" said the captain.
	Pierre then explained that he had loved this woman from his earliestears, but that he had not dared to think of her because she was toooung, and because he had been an illegitimate son without a name.fterwards when he had received a name and wealth he dared not thinkf her because he loved her too well, placing her far above everythingn the world, and especially therefore above himself.
	When he had reached this point, Pierre asked the captain whethere understood that.
	The captain made a gesture signifying that even if he did notnderstand it he begged Pierre to continue.
	"Platonic love, clouds..." he muttered.
	Whether it was the wine he had drunk, or an impulse of frankness, orhe thought that this man did not, and never would, know any ofhose who played a part in his story, or whether it was all thesehings together, something loosened Pierre's tongue. Speakinghickly and with a faraway look in his shining eyes, he told the wholetory of his life: his marriage, Natasha's love for his best friend,er betrayal of him, and all his own simple relations with her.rged on by Ramballe's questions he also told what he had at firstoncealed- his own position and even his name.
	More than anything else in Pierre's story the captain wasmpressed by the fact that Pierre was very rich, had two mansions inoscow, and that he had abandoned everything and not left the city,ut remained there concealing his name and station.
	When it was late at night they went out together into the street.he night was warm and light. To the left of the house on the Pokrovka fire glowed- the first of those that were beginning in Moscow. Tohe right and high up in the sky was the sickle of the waning moon andpposite to it hung that bright comet which was connected inierre's heart with his love. At the gate stood Gerasim, the cook, andwo Frenchmen. Their laughter and their mutually incomprehensibleemarks in two languages could be heard. They were looking at the gloween in the town.
	There was nothing terrible in the one small, distant fire in themmense city.
	Gazing at the high starry sky, at the moon, at the comet, and at thelow from the fire, Pierre experienced a joyful emotion. "There now,ow good it is, what more does one need?" thought he. And suddenlyemembering his intention he grew dizzy and felt so faint that heeaned against the fence to save himself from falling.
	Without taking leave of his new friend, Pierre left the gate withnsteady steps and returning to his room lay down on the sofa andmmediately fell asleep.BK11|CH30
	CHAPTER XXX
	The glow of the first fire that began on the second of September wasatched from the various roads by the fugitive Muscovites and by theetreating troops, with many different feelings.
	The Rostov party spent the night at Mytishchi, fourteen miles fromoscow. They had started so late on the first of September, the roadad been so blocked by vehicles and troops, so many things had beenorgotten for which servants were sent back, that they had decidedo spend that night at a place three miles out of Moscow. The nextorning they woke late and were again delayed so often that theynly got as far as Great Mytishchi. At ten o'clock that evening theostov family and the wounded traveling with them were all distributedn the yards and huts of that large village. The Rostovs' servants andoachmen and the orderlies of the wounded officers, after attending toheir masters, had supper, fed the horses, and came out into theorches.
	In a neighboring hut lay Raevski's adjutant with a fracturedrist. The awful pain he suffered made him moan incessantly anditeously, and his moaning sounded terrible in the darkness of theutumn night. He had spent the first night in the same yard as theostovs. The countess said she had been unable to close her eyes onccount of his moaning, and at Mytishchi she moved into a worse hutimply to be farther away from the wounded man.
	In the darkness of the night one of the servants noticed, abovehe high body of a coach standing before the porch, the small glowf another fire. One glow had long been visible and everybody knewhat it was Little Mytishchi burning- set on fire by Mamonov'sossacks.
	"But look here, brothers, there's another fire!" remarked anrderly.
	All turned their attention to the glow.
	"But they told us Little Mytishchi had been set on fire by Mamonov'sossacks."
	"But that's not Mytishchi, it's farther away."
	"Look, it must be in Moscow!"
	Two of the gazers went round to the other side of the coach andat down on its steps.
	"It's more to the left, why, Little Mytishchi is over there, andhis is right on the other side."
	Several men joined the first two.
	"See how it's flaring," said one. "That's a fire in Moscow: eithern the Sushchevski or the Rogozhski quarter."
	No one replied to this remark and for some time they all gazedilently at the spreading flames of the second fire in the distance.
	Old Daniel Terentich, the count's valet (as he was called), camep to the group and shouted at Mishka.
	"What are you staring at, you good-for-nothing?... The count will bealling and there's nobody there; go and gather the clothes together."
	"I only ran out to get some water," said Mishka.
	"But what do you think, Daniel Terentich? Doesn't it look as if thatlow were in Moscow?" remarked one of the footmen.
	Daniel Terentich made no reply, and again for a long time theyere all silent. The glow spread, rising and failing, farther andarther still.
	"God have mercy.... It's windy and dry..." said another voice.
	"Just look! See what it's doing now. O Lord! You can even see therows flying. Lord have mercy on us sinners!"
	"They'll put it out, no fear!"
	"Who's to put it out?" Daniel Terentich, who had hitherto beenilent, was heard to say. His voice was calm and deliberate. "Moscowt is, brothers," said he. "Mother Moscow, the white..." his voicealtered, and he gave way to an old man's sob.
	And it was as if they had all only waited for this to realize theignificance for them of the glow they were watching. Sighs wereeard, words of prayer, and the sobbing of the count's old valet.BK11|CH31
	CHAPTER XXXI
	The valet, returning to the cottage, informed the count thatoscow was burning. The count donned his dressing gown and went out toook. Sonya and Madame Schoss, who had not yet undressed, went outith him. Only Natasha and the countess remained in the room. Petyaas no longer with the family, he had gone on with his regimenthich was making for Troitsa.
	The countess, on hearing that Moscow was on fire, began to cry.atasha, pale, with a fixed look, was sitting on the bench under thecons just where she had sat down on arriving and paid no attention toer father's words. She was listening to the ceaseless moaning ofhe adjutant, three houses off.
	"Oh, how terrible," said Sonya returning from the yard chilled andrightened. "I believe the whole of Moscow will burn, there's an awfullow! Natasha, do look! You can see it from the window," she said toer cousin, evidently wishing to distract her mind.
	But Natasha looked at her as if not understanding what was said toer and again fixed her eyes on the corner of the stove. She hadeen in this condition of stupor since the morning, when Sonya, to theurprise and annoyance of the countess, had for some unaccountableeason found it necessary to tell Natasha of Prince Andrew's wound andf his being with their party. The countess had seldom been so angryith anyone as she was with Sonya. Sonya had cried and begged to beorgiven and now, as if trying to atone for her fault, paidnceasing attention to her cousin.
	"Look, Natasha, how dreadfully it is burning!" said she.
	"What's burning?" asked Natasha. "Oh, yes, Moscow."
	And as if in order not to offend Sonya and to get rid of her, sheurned her face to the window, looked out in such a way that it wasvident that she could not see anything, and again settled down in herormer attitude.
	"But you didn't see it!"
	"Yes, really I did," Natasha replied in a voice that pleaded to beeft in peace.
	Both the countess and Sonya understood that, naturally, neitheroscow nor the burning of Moscow nor anything else could seem ofmportance to Natasha.
	The count returned and lay down behind the partition. The countessent up to her daughter and touched her head with the back of her hands she was wont to do when Natasha was ill, then touched herorehead with her lips as if to feel whether she was feverish, andinally kissed her.
	"You are cold. You are trembling all over. You'd better lie down,"aid the countess.
	"Lie down? All right, I will. I'll lie down at once," said Natasha.
	When Natasha had been told that morning that Prince Andrew waseriously wounded and was traveling with their party, she had at firstsked many questions: Where was he going? How was he wounded? Was iterious? And could she see him? But after she had been told that sheould not see him, that he was seriously wounded but that his life wasot in danger, she ceased to ask questions or to speak at all,vidently disbelieving what they told her, and convinced that say whathe might she would still be told the same. All the way she had satotionless in a corner of the coach with wide open eyes, and thexpression in them which the countess knew so well and feared so much,nd now she sat in the same way on the bench where she had seatederself on arriving. She was planning something and either deciding orad already decided something in her mind. The countess knew this, buthat it might be she did not know, and this alarmed and tormented her.
	"Natasha, undress, darling; lie down on my bed."
	A bed had been made on a bedstead for the countess only. Madamechoss and the two girls were to sleep on some hay on the floor.
	"No, Mamma, I will lie down here on the floor," Natasha repliedrritably and she went to the window and opened it. Through the openindow the moans of the adjutant could be heard more distinctly. Sheut her head out into the damp night air, and the countess saw herlim neck shaking with sobs and throbbing against the window frame.atasha knew it was not Prince Andrew who was moaning. She knew Princendrew was in the same yard as themselves and in a part of the hutcross the passage; but this dreadful incessant moaning made herob. The countess exchanged a look with Sonya.
	"Lie down, darling; lie down, my pet," said the countess, softlyouching Natasha's shoulders. "Come, lie down."
	"Oh, yes... I'll lie down at once," said Natasha, and beganurriedly undressing, tugging at the tapes of her petticoat.
	When she had thrown off her dress and put on a dressing jacket,he sat down with her foot under her on the bed that had been madep on the floor, jerked her thin and rather short plait of hair to theront, and began replaiting it. Her long, thin, practiced fingersapidly unplaited, replaited, and tied up her plait. Her head movedrom side to side from habit, but her eyes, feverishly wide, lookedixedly before her. When her toilet for the night was finished sheank gently onto the sheet spread over the hay on the side nearest theoor.
	"Natasha, you'd better lie in the middle," said Sonya.
	"I'll stay here," muttered Natasha. "Do lie down," she addedrossly, and buried her face in the pillow.
	The countess, Madame Schoss, and Sonya undressed hastily and layown. The small lamp in front of the icons was the only light leftn the room. But in the yard there was a light from the fire at Littleytishchi a mile and a half away, and through the night came the noisef people shouting at a tavern Mamonov's Cossacks had set up acrosshe street, and the adjutant's unceasing moans could still be heard.
	For a long time Natasha listened attentively to the sounds thateached her from inside and outside the room and did not move. Firsthe heard her mother praying and sighing and the creaking of her bednder her, then Madame Schoss' familiar whistling snore and Sonya'sentle breathing. Then the countess called to Natasha. Natasha did notnswer.
	"I think she's asleep, Mamma," said Sonya softly.
	After short silence the countess spoke again but this time no oneeplied.
	Soon after that Natasha heard her mother's even breathing. Natashaid not move, though her little bare foot, thrust out from under theuilt, was growing cold on the bare floor.
	As if to celebrate a victory over everybody, a cricket chirped in crack in the wall. A cock crowed far off and another replied neary. The shouting in the tavern had died down; only the moaning ofhe adjutant was heard. Natasha sat up.
	"Sonya, are you asleep? Mamma?" she whispered.
	No one replied. Natasha rose slowly and carefully, crossederself, and stepped cautiously on the cold and dirty floor with herlim, supple, bare feet. The boards of the floor creaked. Steppingautiously from one foot to the other she ran like a kitten the fewteps to the door and grasped the cold door handle.
	It seemed to her that something heavy was beating rhythmicallygainst all the walls of the room: it was her own heart, sinkingith alarm and terror and overflowing with love.
	She opened the door and stepped across the threshold and onto theold, damp earthen floor of the passage. The cold she felt refresheder. With her bare feet she touched a sleeping man, stepped overim, and opened the door into the part of the hut where Princendrew lay. It was dark in there. In the farthest corner, on a bencheside a bed on which something was lying, stood a tallow candleith a long, thick, and smoldering wick.
	From the moment she had been told that of Prince Andrew's woundnd his presence there, Natasha had resolved to see him. She did notnow why she had to, she knew the meeting would be painful, but felthe more convinced that it was necessary.
	All day she had lived only in hope of seeing him that night. But nowhat the moment had come she was filled with dread of what she mightee. How was he maimed? What was left of him? Was he like thatncessant moaning of the adjutant's? Yes, he was altogether like that.n her imagination he was that terrible moaning personified. Whenhe saw an indistinct shape in the corner, and mistook his kneesaised under the quilt for his shoulders, she imagined a horrible bodyhere, and stood still in terror. But an irresistible impulse drew herorward. She cautiously took one step and then another, and founderself in the middle of a small room containing baggage. Another man-imokhin- was lying in a corner on the benches beneath the icons,nd two others- the doctor and a valet- lay on the floor.
	The valet sat up and whispered something. Timokhin, kept awake byhe pain in his wounded leg, gazed with wide-open eyes at this strangepparition of a girl in a white chemise, dressing jacket, andightcap. The valet's sleepy, frightened exclamation, "What do youant? What's the matter?" made Natasha approach more swiftly to whatas lying in the corner. Horribly unlike a man as that body looked,he must see him. She passed the valet, the snuff fell from the candleick, and she saw Prince Andrew clearly with his arms outside theuilt, and such as she had always seen him.
	He was the same as ever, but the feverish color of his face, hislittering eyes rapturously turned toward her, and especially hiseck, delicate as a child's, revealed by the turn-down collar of hishirt, gave him a peculiarly innocent, childlike look, such as she hadever seen on him before. She went up to him and with a swift,lexible, youthful movement dropped on her knees.
	He smiled and held out his hand to her.BK11|CH32
	CHAPTER XXXII
	Seven days had passed since Prince Andrew found himself in thembulance station on the field of Borodino. His feverish state and thenflammation of his bowels, which were injured, were in the doctor'spinion sure to carry him off. But on the seventh day he ate withleasure a piece of bread with some tea, and the doctor noticed thatis temperature was lower. He had regained consciousness that morning.he first night after they left Moscow had been fairly warm and he hademained in the caleche, but at Mytishchi the wounded man himselfsked to be taken out and given some tea. The pain caused by hisemoval into the hut had made him groan aloud and again loseonsciousness. When he had been placed on his camp bed he lay for aong time motionless with closed eyes. Then he opened them andhispered softly: "And the tea?" His remembering such a small detailf everyday life astonished the doctor. He felt Prince Andrew's pulse,nd to his surprise and dissatisfaction found it had improved. Heas dissatisfied because he knew by experience that if his patient didot die now, he would do so a little later with greater suffering.imokhin, the red-nosed major of Prince Andrew's regiment, hadoined him in Moscow and was being taken along with him, having beenounded in the leg at the battle of Borodino. They were accompanied by doctor, Prince Andrew's valet, his coach. man, and two orderlies.
	They gave Prince Andrew some tea. He drank it eagerly, lookingith feverish eyes at the door in front of him as if trying tonderstand and remember something.
	"I don't want any more. Is Timokhin here?" he asked.
	Timokhin crept along the bench to him.
	"I am here, your excellency."
	"How's your wound?"
	"Mine, sir? All right. But how about you?"
	Prince Andrew again pondered as if trying to remember something.
	"Couldn't one get a book?" he asked.
	"What book?"
	"The Gospels. I haven't one."
	The doctor promised to procure it for him and began to ask how heas feeling. Prince Andrew answered all his questions reluctantlyut reasonably, and then said he wanted a bolster placed under hims he was uncomfortable and in great pain. The doctor and valet liftedhe cloak with which he was covered and, making wry faces at theoisome smell of mortifying flesh that came from the wound, beganxamining that dreadful place. The doctor was very much displeasedbout something and made a change in the dressings, turning theounded man over so that he groaned again and grew unconscious andelirious from the agony. He kept asking them to get him the booknd put it under him.
	"What trouble would it be to you?" he said. "I have not got one.lease get it for me and put it under for a moment," he pleaded in aiteous voice.
	The doctor went into the passage to wash his hands.
	"You fellows have no conscience," said he to the valet who wasouring water over his hands. "For just one moment I didn't look afterou... It's such pain, you know, that I wonder how he can bear it."
	"By the Lord Jesus Christ, I thought we had put something underim!" said the valet.
	The first time Prince Andrew understood where he was and what washe matter with him and remembered being wounded and how was when hesked to be carried into the hut after his caleche had stopped atytishchi. After growing confused from pain while being carried intohe hut he again regained consciousness, and while drinking tea onceore recalled all that had happened to him, and above all vividlyemembered the moment at the ambulance station when, at the sight ofhe sufferings of a man he disliked, those new thoughts had come toim which promised him happiness. And those thoughts, though now vaguend indefinite, again possessed his soul. He remembered that he hadow a new source of happiness and that this happiness had something too with the Gospels. That was why he asked for a copy of them. Thencomfortable position in which they had put him and turned him overgain confused his thoughts, and when he came to himself a thirdime it was in the complete stillness of the night. Everybody near himas sleeping. A cricket chirped from across the passage; someone washouting and singing in the street; cockroaches rustled on theable, on the icons, and on the walls, and a big fly flopped at theead of the bed and around the candle beside him, the wick of whichas charred and had shaped itself like a mushroom.
	His mind was not in a normal state. A healthy man usually thinks of,eels, and remembers innumerable things simultaneously, but has theower and will to select one sequence of thoughts or events on whicho fix his whole attention. A healthy man can tear himself away fromhe deepest reflections to say a civil word to someone who comes innd can then return again to his own thoughts. But Prince Andrew'sind was not in a normal state in that respect. All the powers ofis mind were more active and clearer than ever, but they actedpart from his will. Most diverse thoughts and images occupied himimultaneously. At times his brain suddenly began to work with aigor, clearness, and depth it had never reached when he was inealth, but suddenly in the midst of its work it would turn to somenexpected idea and he had not the strength to turn it back again.
	"Yes, a new happiness was revealed to me of which man cannot beeprived," he thought as he lay in the semi-darkness of the quiet hut,azing fixedly before him with feverish wide open eyes. "A happinessying beyond material forces, outside the material influences that actn man- a happiness of the soul alone, the happiness of loving.very man can understand it, but to conceive it and enjoin it wasossible only for God. But how did God enjoin that law? And why washe Son...?"
	And suddenly the sequence of these thoughts broke off, and Princendrew heard (without knowing whether it was a delusion or reality) soft whispering voice incessantly and rhythmically repeatingpiti-piti-piti," and then "titi," and then again "piti-piti-piti,"nd "ti-ti" once more. At the same time he felt that above his face,bove the very middle of it, some strange airy structure was beingrected out of slender needles or splinters, to the sound of thishispered music. He felt that he had to balance carefully (though itas difficult) so that this airy structure should not collapse; butevertheless it kept collapsing and again slowly rising to the soundf whispered rhythmic music- "it stretches, stretches, spreading outnd stretching," said Prince Andrew to himself. While listening tohis whispering and feeling the sensation of this drawing out andhe construction of this edifice of needles, he also saw by glimpses aed halo round the candle, and heard the rustle of the cockroaches andhe buzzing of the fly that flopped against his pillow and his face.ach time the fly touched his face it gave him a burning sensation andet to his surprise it did not destroy the structure, though itnocked against the very region of his face where it was rising. Butesides this there was something else of importance. It wasomething white by the door- the statue of a sphinx, which alsoppressed him.
	"But perhaps that's my shirt on the table," he thought, "andhat's my legs, and that is the door, but why is it alwaystretching and drawing itself out, and 'piti-piti-piti' and 'ti-ti'nd 'piti-piti-piti'...? That's enough, please leave off!" Princendrew painfully entreated someone. And suddenly thoughts and feelingsgain swam to the surface of his mind with peculiar clearness andorce.
	"Yes- love," he thought again quite clearly. "But not love whichoves for something, for some quality, for some purpose, or for someeason, but the love which I- while dying- first experienced when Iaw my enemy and yet loved him. I experienced that feeling of lovehich is the very essence of the soul and does not require anbject. Now again I feel that bliss. To love one's neighbors, toove one's enemies, to love everything, to love God in all Hisanifestations. It is possible to love someone dear to you withuman love, but an enemy can only be loved by divine love. That is why experienced such joy when I felt that I loved that man. What hasecome of him? Is he alive?...
	"When loving with human love one may pass from love to hatred, butivine love cannot change. No, neither death nor anything else canestroy it. It is the very essence of the soul. Yet how many peopleave I hated in my life? And of them all, I loved and hated none as did her." And he vividly pictured to himself Natasha, not as head done in the past with nothing but her charms which gave himelight, but for the first time picturing to himself her soul. Ande understood her feelings, her sufferings, shame, and remorse. He nownderstood for the first time all the cruelty of his rejection of her,he cruelty of his rupture with her. "If only it were possible fore to see her once more! Just once, looking into those eyes to say..."
	"Piti-piti-piti and ti-ti and piti-piti-piti boom!" flopped thely... And his attention was suddenly carried into another world, aorld of reality and delirium in which something particular wasappening. In that world some structure was still being erected andid not fall, something was still stretching out, and the candleith its red halo was still burning, and the same shirtlike sphinx layear the door; but besides all this something creaked, there was ahiff of fresh air, and a new white sphinx appeared, standing at theoor. And that sphinx had the pale face and shining eyes of the veryatasha of whom he had just been thinking.
	"Oh, how oppressive this continual delirium is," thought Princendrew, trying to drive that face from his imagination. But the faceemained before him with the force of reality and drew nearer.rince Andrew wished to return that former world of pure thought,ut he could not, and delirium drew him back into its domain. The softhispering voice continued its rhythmic murmur, something oppressedim and stretched out, and the strange face was before him. Princendrew collected all his strength in an effort to recover hisenses, he moved a little, and suddenly there was a ringing in hisars, a dimness in his eyes, and like a man plunged into water he lostonsciousness. When he came to himself, Natasha, that same livingatasha whom of all people he most longed to love with this new pureivine love that had been revealed to him, was kneeling before him. Heealized that it was the real living Natasha, and he was not surprisedut quietly happy. Natasha, motionless on her knees (she was unable totir), with frightened eyes riveted on him, was restraining herobs. Her face was pale and rigid. Only in the lower part of itomething quivered.
	Prince Andrew sighed with relief, smiled, and held out his hand.
	"You?" he said. "How fortunate!"
	With a rapid but careful movement Natasha drew nearer to him oner knees and, taking his hand carefully, bent her face over it andegan kissing it, just touching it lightly with her lips.
	"Forgive me!" she whispered, raising her head and glancing at him.Forgive me!"
	"I love you," said Prince Andrew.
	"Forgive...!"
	"Forgive what?" he asked.
	"Forgive me for what I ha-ve do-ne!" faltered Natasha in acarcely audible, broken whisper, and began kissing his hand moreapidly, just touching it with her lips.
	"I love you more, better than before," said Prince Andrew, liftinger face with his hand so as to look into her eyes.
	Those eyes, filled with happy tears, gazed at him timidly,ompassionately, and with joyous love. Natasha's thin pale face,ith its swollen lips, was more than plain- it was dreadful. Butrince Andrew did not see that, he saw her shining eyes which wereeautiful. They heard the sound of voices behind them.
	Peter the valet, who was now wide awake, had roused the doctor.imokhin, who had not slept at all because of the pain in his leg, hadong been watching all that was going on, carefully covering hisare body with the sheet as he huddled up on his bench.
	"What's this?" said the doctor, rising from his bed. "Please goway, madam!"
	At that moment a maid sent by the countess, who had noticed heraughter's absence, knocked at the door.
	Like a somnambulist aroused from her sleep Natasha went out of theoom and, returning to her hut, fell sobbing on her bed.
	From that time, during all the rest of the Rostovs' journey, atvery halting place and wherever they spent a night, Natasha nevereft the wounded Bolkonski, and the doctor had to admit that he hadot expected from a young girl either such firmness or such skill inursing a wounded man.
	Dreadful as the countess imagined it would be should Prince Andrewie in her daughter's arms during the journey- as, judging by what theoctor said, it seemed might easily happen- she could not opposeatasha. Though with the intimacy now established between theounded man and Natasha the thought occurred that should he recoverheir former engagement would be renewed, no one- least of all Natashand Prince Andrew- spoke of this: the unsettled question of life andeath, which hung not only over Bolkonski but over all Russia, shutut all other considerations.BK11|CH33
	CHAPTER XXXIII
	On the third of September Pierre awoke late. His head was aching,he clothes in which he had slept without undressing feltncomfortable on his body, and his mind had a dim consciousness ofomething shameful he had done the day before. That something shamefulas his yesterday's conversation with Captain Ramballe.
	It was eleven by the clock, but it seemed peculiarly dark out ofoors. Pierre rose, rubbed his eyes, and seeing the pistol with anngraved stock which Gerasim had replaced on the writing table, heemembered where he was and what lay before him that very day.
	"Am I not too late?" he thought. "No, probably he won't make hisntry into Moscow before noon."
	Pierre did not allow himself to reflect on what lay before him,ut hastened to act.
	After arranging his clothes, he took the pistol and was about too out. But it then occurred to him for the first time that heertainly could not carry the weapon in his hand through thetreets. It was difficult to hide such a big pistol even under hiside coat. He could not carry it unnoticed in his belt or under hisrm. Besides, it had been discharged, and he had not had time toeload it. "No matter, dagger will do," he said to himself, thoughhen planning his design he had more than once come to theonclusion that the chief mistake made by the student in 1809 had beeno try to kill Napoleon with a dagger. But as his chief aimonsisted not in carrying out his design, but in proving to himselfhat he would not abandon his intention and was doing all he couldo achieve it, Pierre hastily took the blunt jagged dagger in areen sheath which he had bought at the Sukharev market with theistol, and hid it under his waistcoat.
	Having tied a girdle over his coat and pulled his cap low on hisead, Pierre went down the corridor, trying to avoid making a noise oreeting the captain, and passed out into the street.
	The conflagration, at which he had looked with so muchndifference the evening before, had greatly increased during theight. Moscow was on fire in several places. The buildings in Carriageow, across the river, in the Bazaar and the Povarskoy, as well as thearges on the Moskva River and the timber yards by the Dorogomilovridge, were all ablaze.
	Pierre's way led through side streets to the Povarskoy and fromhere to the church of St. Nicholas on the Arbat, where he had longefore decided that the deed should should be done. The gates ofost of the houses were locked and the shutters up. The streets andanes were deserted. The air was full of smoke and the smell ofurning. Now and then he met Russians with anxious and timid faces,nd Frenchmen with an air not of the city but of the camp, walkingn the middle of the streets. Both the Russians and the Frenchooked at Pierre with surprise. Besides his height and stoutness,nd the strange morose look of suffering in his face and whole figure,he Russians stared at Pierre because they could not make out tohat class he could belong. The French followed him withstonishment in their eyes chiefly because Pierre, unlike all thether Russians who gazed at the French with fear and curiosity, paido attention to them. At the gate of one house three Frenchmen, whoere explaining something to some Russians who did not understandhem, stopped Pierre asking if he did not know French.
	Pierre shook his head and went on. In another side street a sentineltanding beside a green caisson shouted at him, but only when thehout was threateningly repeated and he heard the click of the man'susket as he raised it did Pierre understand that he had to pass onhe other side of the street. He heard nothing and saw nothing of whatent on around him. He carried his resolution within himself in terrornd haste, like something dreadful and alien to him, for, after therevious night's experience, he was afraid of losing it. But he wasot destined to bring his mood safely to his destination. And even hade not been hindered by anything on the way, his intention could notow have been carried out, for Napoleon had passed the Arbat more thanour hours previously on his way from the Dorogomilov suburb to theremlin, and was now sitting in a very gloomy frame of mind in a royaltudy in the Kremlin, giving detailed and exact orders as toeasures to be taken immediately to extinguish the fire, to preventooting, and to reassure the inhabitants. But Pierre did not knowhis; he was entirely absorbed in what lay before him, and wasortured- as those are who obstinately undertake a task that ismpossible for them not because of its difficulty but because of itsncompatibility with their natures- by the fear of weakening at theecisive moment and so losing his self-esteem.
	Though he heard and saw nothing around him he found his way bynstinct and did not go wrong in the side streets that led to theovarskoy.
	As Pierre approached that street the smoke became denser and denser-e even felt the heat of the fire. Occasionally curly tongues of flameose from under the roofs of the houses. He met more people in thetreets and they were more excited. But Pierre, though he felt thatomething unusual was happening around him, did not realize that heas approaching the fire. As he was going along a foot path across aide-open space adjoining the Povarskoy on one side and the gardens ofrince Gruzinski's house on the other, Pierre suddenly heard theesperate weeping of a woman close to him. He stopped as ifwakening from a dream and lifted his head.
	By the side of the path, on the dusty dry grass, all sorts ofousehold goods lay in a heap: featherbeds, a samovar, icons, andrunks. On the ground, beside the trunks, sat a thin woman no longeroung, with long, prominent upper teeth, and wearing a black cloak andap. This woman, swaying to and fro and muttering something, washoking with sobs. Two girls of about ten and twelve, dressed in dirtyhort frocks and cloaks, were staring at their mother with a look oftupefaction on their pale frightened faces. The youngest child, a boyf about seven, who wore an overcoat and an immense cap evidentlyot his own, was crying in his old nurse's arms. A dirty, barefootedaid was sitting on a trunk, and, having undone her pale-coloredlait, was pulling it straight and sniffing at her singed hair. Theoman's husband, a short, round-shouldered man in the undressniform of a civilian official, with sausage-shaped whiskers andhowing under his square-set cap the hair smoothly brushed forwardver his temples, with expressionless face was moving the trunks,hich were placed one on another, and was dragging some garmentsrom under them.
	As soon as she saw Pierre, the woman almost threw herself at hiseet.
	"Dear people, good Christians, save me, help me, dear friends...elp us, somebody," she muttered between her sobs. "My girl... Myaughter! My youngest daughter is left behind. She's burned! Ooh!as it for this I nursed you.... Ooh!"
	"Don't, Mary Nikolievna!" said her husband to her in a low voice,vidently only to justify himself before the stranger. "Sister mustave taken her, or else where can she be?" he added.
	"Monster! Villain!" shouted the woman angrily, suddenly ceasing toeep. "You have no heart, you don't feel for your own child! Anotheran would have rescued her from the fire. But this is a monster andeither a man nor a father! You, honored sir, are a noble man," sheent on, addressing Pierre rapidly between her sobs. "The fire brokeut alongside, and blew our way, the maid called out 'Fire!' and weushed to collect our things. We ran out just as we were.... This ishat we have brought away.... The icons, and my dowry bed, all theest is lost. We seized the children. But not Katie! Ooh! Oord!..." and again she began to sob. "My child, my dear one!urned, burned!"
	"But where was she left?" asked Pierre.
	From the expression of his animated face the woman saw that this manight help her.
	"Oh, dear sir!" she cried, seizing him by the legs. "Myenefactor, set my heart at ease.... Aniska, go, you horrid girl, showim the way!" she cried to the maid, angrily opening her mouth andtill farther exposing her long teeth.
	"Show me the way, show me, I... I'll do it," gasped Pierre rapidly.
	The dirty maidservant stepped from behind the trunk, put up herlait, sighed, and went on her short, bare feet along the path. Pierreelt as if he had come back to life after a heavy swoon. He held hisead higher, his eyes shone with the light of life, and with swiftteps he followed the maid, overtook her, and came out on theovarskoy. The whole street was full of clouds of black smoke. Tonguesf flame here and there broke through that cloud. A great number ofeople crowded in front of the conflagration. In the middle of thetreet stood a French general saying something to those around him.ierre, accompanied by the maid, was advancing to the spot where theeneral stood, but the French soldiers stopped him.
	"On ne passe pas!"* cried a voice.
	*"You can't pass!
	"This way, uncle," cried the girl. "We'll pass through the sidetreet, by the Nikulins'!"
	Pierre turned back, giving a spring now and then to keep up wither. She ran across the street, turned down a side street to the left,nd, passing three houses, turned into a yard on the right.
	"It's here, close by," said she and, running across the yard, opened gate in a wooden fence and, stopping, pointed out to him a smallooden wing of the house, which was burning brightly and fiercely. Onef its sides had fallen in, another was on fire, and bright flamesssued from the openings of the windows and from under the roof.
	As Pierre passed through the fence gate, he was enveloped by hot airnd involuntarily stopped.
	"Which is it? Which is your house?" he asked.
	"Ooh!" wailed the girl, pointing to the wing. "That's it, that wasur lodging. You've burned to death, our treasure, Katie, myrecious little missy! Ooh!" lamented Aniska, who at the sight ofhe fire felt that she too must give expression to her feelings.
	Pierre rushed to the wing, but the heat was so great that henvoluntarily passed round in a curve and came upon the large househat was as yet burning only at one end, just below the roof, andround which swarmed a crowd of Frenchmen. At first Pierre did notealize what these men, who were dragging something out, were about;ut seeing before him a Frenchman hitting a peasant with a blunt sabernd trying to take from him a fox-fur coat, he vaguely understood thatooting was going on there, but he had no time to dwell on that idea.
	The sounds of crackling and the din of falling walls and ceilings,he whistle and hiss of the flames, the excited shouts of theeople, and the sight of the swaying smoke, now gathering into thicklack clouds and now soaring up with glittering sparks, with herend there dense sheaves of flame (now red and now like golden fishcales creeping along the walls), and the heat and smoke andapidity of motion, produced on Pierre the usual animating effectsf a conflagration. It had a peculiarly strong effect on him becauset the sight of the fire he felt himself suddenly freed from the ideashat had weighed him down. He felt young, bright, adroit, andesolute. He ran round to the other side of the lodge and was about toash into that part of it which was still standing, when just aboveis head he heard several voices shouting and then a cracking soundnd the ring of something heavy falling close beside him.
	Pierre looked up and saw at a window of the large house somerenchmen who had just thrown out the drawer of a chest, filled withetal articles. Other French soldiers standing below went up to therawer.
	"What does this fellow want?" shouted one of them referring toierre.
	"There's a child in that house. Haven't you seen a child?" criedierre.
	"What's he talking about? Get along!" said several voices, and onef the soldiers, evidently afraid that Pierre might want to takerom them some of the plate and bronzes that were in the drawer, movedhreateningly toward him.
	"A child?" shouted a Frenchman from above. "I did hear somethingquealing in the garden. Perhaps it's his brat that the fellow isooking for. After all, one must be human, you know...."
	"Where is it? Where?" said Pierre.
	"There! There!" shouted the Frenchman at the window, pointing to thearden at the back of the house. "Wait a bit- I'm coming down."
	And a minute or two later the Frenchman, a black-eyed fellow with spot on his cheek, in shirt sleeves, really did jump out of a windown the ground floor, and clapping Pierre on the shoulder ran withim into the garden.
	"Hurry up, you others!" he called out to his comrades. "It's gettingot."
	When they reached a gravel path behind the house the Frenchmanulled Pierre by the arm and pointed to a round, graveled spacehere a three-year-old girl in a pink dress was lying under a seat.
	"There is your child! Oh, a girl, so much the better!" said therenchman. "Good-by, Fatty. We must be human, we are all mortal younow!" and the Frenchman with the spot on his cheek ran back to hisomrades.
	Breathless with joy, Pierre ran to the little girl and was goingo take her in his arms. But seeing a stranger the sickly,crofulous-looking child, unattractively like her mother, began toell and run away. Pierre, however, seized her and lifted her in hisrms. She screamed desperately and angrily and tried with her littleands to pull Pierre's hands away and to bite them with her slobberingouth. Pierre was seized by a sense of horror and repulsion such as head experienced when touching some nasty little animal. But he made anffort not to throw the child down and ran with her to the largeouse. It was now, however, impossible to get back the way he hadome; the maid, Aniska, was no longer there, and Pierre with a feelingf pity and disgust pressed the wet, painfully sobbing child toimself as tenderly as he could and ran with her through the gardeneeking another way out.BK11|CH34
	CHAPTER XXXIV
	Having run through different yards and side streets, Pierre got backith his little burden to the Gruzinski garden at the corner of theovarskoy. He did not at first recognize the place from which he hadet out to look for the child, so crowded was it now with people andoods that had been dragged out of the houses. Besides Russianamilies who had taken refuge here from the fire with theirelongings, there were several French soldiers in a variety oflothing. Pierre took no notice of them. He hurried to find the familyf that civil servant in order to restore the daughter to her mothernd go to save someone else. Pierre felt that he had still much too and to do quickly. Glowing with the heat and from running, heelt at that moment more strongly than ever the sense of youth,nimation, and determination that had come on him when he ran toave the child. She had now become quiet and, clinging with her littleands to Pierre's coat, sat on his arm gazing about her like someittle wild animal. He glanced at her occasionally with a slightmile. He fancied he saw something pathetically innocent in thatrightened, sickly little face.
	He did not find the civil servant or his wife where he had lefthem. He walked among the crowd with rapid steps, scanning the variousaces he met. Involuntarily he noticed a Georgian or Armenian familyonsisting of a very handsome old man of Oriental type, wearing a new,loth-covered, sheepskin coat and new boots, an old woman of similarype, and a young woman. That very young woman seemed to Pierre theerfection of Oriental beauty, with her sharply outlined, arched,lack eyebrows and the extraordinarily soft, bright color of her long,eautiful, expressionless face. Amid the scattered property and therowd on the open space, she, in her rich satin cloak with a brightilac shawl on her head, suggested a delicate exotic plant thrownut onto the snow. She was sitting on some bundles a little behind theld woman, and looked from under her long lashes with motionless,arge, almond-shaped eyes at the ground before her. Evidently sheas aware of her beauty and fearful because of it. Her face struckierre and, hurrying along by the fence, he turned several times toook at her. When he had reached the fence, still without findinghose he sought, he stopped and looked about him.
	With the child in his arms his figure was now more conspicuoushan before, and a group of Russians, both men and women, gatheredbout him.
	"Have you lost anyone, my dear fellow? You're of the gentryourself, aren't you? Whose child is it?" they asked him.
	Pierre replied that the child belonged to a woman in a black coatho had been sitting there with her other children, and he askedhether anyone knew where she had gone.
	"Why, that must be the Anferovs," said an old deacon, addressing aockmarked peasant woman. "Lord have mercy, Lord have mercy!" he addedn his customary bass.
	"The Anferovs? No," said the woman. "They left in the morning.hat must be either Mary Nikolievna's or the Ivanovs'!"
	"He says 'a woman,' and Mary Nikolievna is a lady," remarked a houseerf.
	"Do you know her? She's thin, with long teeth," said Pierre.
	"That's Mary Nikolievna! They went inside the garden when theseolves swooped down," said the woman, pointing to the French soldiers.
	"O Lord, have mercy!" added the deacon.
	"Go over that way, they're there. It's she! She kept on lamentingnd crying," continued the woman. "It's she. Here, this way!"
	But Pierre was not listening to the woman. He had for some secondseen intently watching what was going on a few steps away. He wasooking at the Armenian family and at two French soldiers who had gonep to them. One of these, a nimble little man, was wearing a blue coatied round the waist with a rope. He had a nightcap on his head andis feet were bare. The other, whose appearance particularly struckierre, was a long, lank, round-shouldered, fair-haired man, slow inis movements and with an idiotic expression of face. He wore aoman's loose gown of frieze, blue trousers, and large torn Hessianoots. The little barefooted Frenchman in the blue coat went up to thermenians and, saying something, immediately seized the old man by hisegs and the old man at once began pulling off his boots. The other inhe frieze gown stopped in front of the beautiful Armenian girl andith his hands in his pockets stood staring at her, motionless andilent.
	"Here, take the child!" said Pierre peremptorily and hurriedly tohe woman, handing the little girl to her. "Give her back to them,ive her back!" he almost shouted, putting the child, who begancreaming, on the ground, and again looking at the Frenchman and thermenian family.
	The old man was already sitting barefoot. The little Frenchman hadecured his second boot and was slapping one boot against the other.he old man was saying something in a voice broken by sobs, but Pierreaught but a glimpse of this, his whole attention was directed tohe Frenchman in the frieze gown who meanwhile, swaying slowly fromide to side, had drawn nearer to the young woman and taking his handsrom his pockets had seized her by the neck.
	The beautiful Armenian still sat motionless and in the samettitude, with her long lashes drooping as if she did not see oreel what the soldier was doing to her.
	While Pierre was running the few steps that separated him from therenchman, the tall marauder in the frieze gown was already tearingrom her neck the necklace the young Armenian was wearing, and theoung woman, clutching at her neck, screamed piercingly.
	"Let that woman alone!" exclaimed Pierre hoarsely in a furiousoice, seizing the soldier by his round shoulders and throwing himside.
	The soldier fell, got up, and ran away. But his comrade, throwingown the boots and drawing his sword, moved threateningly towardierre.
	"Voyons, Pas de betises!"* he cried.
	*"Look here, no nonsense!"
	Pierre was in such a transport of rage that he remembered nothingnd his strength increased tenfold. He rushed at the barefootedrenchman and, before the latter had time to draw his sword, knockedim off his feet and hammered him with his fists. Shouts of approvalere heard from the crowd around, and at the same moment a mountedatrol of French Uhlans appeared from round the corner. The Uhlansame up at a trot to Pierre and the Frenchman and surrounded them.ierre remembered nothing of what happened after that. He onlyemembered beating someone and being beaten and finally feeling thatis hands were bound and that a crowd of French soldiers stoodround him and were searching him.
	"Lieutenant, he has a dagger," were the first words Pierrenderstood.
	"Ah, a weapon?" said the officer and turned to the barefootedoldier who had been arrested with Pierre. "All right, you can tellll about it at the court-martial." Then he turned to Pierre. "Doou speak French?"
	Pierre looked around him with bloodshot eyes and did not reply.is face probably looked very terrible, for the officer said somethingn a whisper and four more Uhlans left the ranks and placed themselvesn both sides of Pierre.
	"Do you speak French?" the officer asked again, keeping at aistance from Pierre. "Call the interpreter."
	A little man in Russian civilian clothes rode out from the ranks,nd by his clothes and manner of speaking Pierre at once knew him toe a French salesman from one of the Moscow shops.
	"He does not look like a common man," said the interpreter, after searching look at Pierre.
	"Ah, he looks very much like an incendiary," remarked the officer.And ask him who he is," he added.
	"Who are you?" asked the interpreter in poor Russian. "You mustnswer the chief."
	"I will not tell you who I am. I am your prisoner- take me!"ierre suddenly replied in French.
	"Ah, ah!" muttered the officer with a frown. "Well then, march!"
	A crowd had collected round the Uhlans. Nearest to Pierre stoodhe pockmarked peasant woman with the little girl, and when the patroltarted she moved forward.
	"Where are they taking you to, you poor dear?" said she. "And theittle girl, the little girl, what am I to do with her if she's notheirs?" said the woman.
	"What does that woman want?" asked the officer.
	Pierre was as if intoxicated. His elation increased at the sightf the little girl he had saved.
	"What does she want?" he murmured. "She is bringing me my daughterhom I have just saved from the flames," said he. "Good-by!" Andithout knowing how this aimless lie had escaped him, he went alongith resolute and triumphant steps between the French soldiers.
	The French patrol was one of those sent out through the varioustreets of Moscow by Durosnel's order to put a stop to the pillage,nd especially to catch the incendiaries who, according to the generalpinion which had that day originated among the higher Frenchfficers, were the cause of the conflagrations. After marching through number of streets the patrol arrested five more Russian suspects: small shopkeeper, two seminary students, a peasant, and a houseerf, besides several looters. But of all these various suspectedharacters, Pierre was considered to be the most suspicious of all.hen they had all been brought for the night to a large house on theubov Rampart that was being used as a guardhouse, Pierre was placedpart under strict guard.BK12	                             BOOK TWELVE: 1812BK12|CH1
	CHAPTER I
	In Petersburg at that time a complicated struggle was beingarried on with greater heat than ever in the highest circles, betweenhe parties of Rumyantsev, the French, Marya Fedorovna, the Tsarevich,nd others, drowned as usual by the buzzing of the court drones. Buthe calm, luxurious life of Petersburg, concerned only abouthantoms and reflections of real life, went on in its old way and madet hard, except by a great effort, to realize the danger and theifficult position of the Russian people. There were the sameeceptions and balls, the same French theater, the same courtnterests and service interests and intrigues as usual. Only in theery highest circles were attempts made to keep in mind theifficulties of the actual position. Stories were whispered of howifferently the two Empresses behaved in these difficultircumstances. The Empress Marya, concerned for the welfare of theharitable and educational institutions under her patronage, had givenirections that they should all be removed to Kazan, and the thingselonging to these institutions had already been packed up. Thempress Elisabeth, however, when asked what instructions she woulde pleased to give- with her characteristic Russian patriotism hadeplied that she could give no directions about state institutions forhat was the affair of the sovereign, but as far as she personally wasoncerned she would be the last to quit Petersburg.
	At Anna Pavlovna's on the twenty-sixth of August, the very day ofhe battle of Borodino, there was a soiree, the chief feature of whichas to be the reading of a letter from His Lordship the Bishop whenending the Emperor an icon of the Venerable Sergius. It wasegarded as a model of ecclesiastical, patriotic eloquence. Princeasili himself, famed for his elocution, was to read it. (He used toead at the Empress'.) The art of his reading was supposed to lie inolling out the words, quite independently of their meaning, in a loudnd singsong voice alternating between a despairing wail and aender murmur, so that the wail fell quite at random on one word andhe murmur on another. This reading, as was always the case at Annaavlovna's soirees, had a political significance. That evening shexpected several important personages who had to be made ashamed ofheir visits to the French theater and aroused to a patrioticemper. A good many people had already arrived, but Anna Pavlovna, notet seeing all those whom she wanted in her drawing room, did notet the reading begin but wound up the springs of a generalonversation.
	The news of the day in Petersburg was the illness of Countessezukhova. She had fallen ill unexpectedly a few days previously,ad missed several gatherings of which she was usually ornament, andas said to be receiving no one, and instead of the celebratedetersburg doctors who usually attended her had entrusted herself toome Italian doctor who was treating her in some new and unusual way.
	They all knew very well that the enchanting countess' illnessrose from an inconvenience resulting from marrying two husbands athe same time, and that the Italian's cure consisted in removinguch inconvenience; but in Anna Pavlovna's presence no one dared tohink of this or even appear to know it.
	"They say the poor countess is very ill. The doctor says it isngina pectoris."
	"Angina? Oh, that's a terrible illness!"
	"They say that the rivals are reconciled, thanks to the angina..."nd the word angina was repeated with great satisfaction.
	"The count is pathetic, they say. He cried like a child when theoctor told him the case was dangerous."
	"Oh, it would be a terrible loss, she is an enchanting woman."
	"You are speaking of the poor countess?" said Anna Pavlovna,oming up just then. "I sent to ask for news, and hear that she is aittle better. Oh, she is certainly the most charming woman in theorld," she went on, with a smile at her own enthusiasm. "We belong toifferent camps, but that does not prevent my esteeming her as sheeserves. She is very unfortunate!" added Anna Pavlovna.
	Supposing that by these words Anna Pavlovna was somewhat lifting theeil from the secret of the countess' malady, an unwary young manentured to express surprise that well known doctors had not beenalled in and that the countess was being attended by a charlatanho might employ dangerous remedies.
	"Your information maybe better than mine," Anna Pavlovna suddenlynd venomously retorted on the inexperienced young man, "but I know onood authority that this doctor is a very learned and able man. Hes private physician to the Queen of Spain."
	And having thus demolished the young man, Anna Pavlovna turned tonother group where Bilibin was talking about the Austrians: havingrinkled up his face he was evidently preparing to smooth it out againnd utter one of his mots.
	"I think it is delightful," he said, referring to a diplomaticote that had been sent to Vienna with some Austrian bannersaptured from the French by Wittgenstein, "the hero of Petropol" as heas then called in Petersburg.
	"What? What's that?" asked Anna Pavlovna, securing silence for theot, which she had heard before.
	And Bilibin repeated the actual words of the diplomatic dispatch,hich he had himself composed.
	"The Emperor returns these Austrian banners," said Bilibin,friendly banners gone astray and found on a wrong path," and his browecame smooth again.
	"Charming, charming!" observed Prince Vasili.
	"The path to Warsaw, perhaps," Prince Hippolyte remarked loudlynd unexpectedly. Everybody looked at him, understanding what heeant. Prince Hippolyte himself glanced around with amused surprise.e knew no more than the others what his words meant. During hisiplomatic career he had more than once noticed that such utterancesere received as very witty, and at every opportunity he uttered inhat way the first words that entered his head. "It may turn outery well," he thought, "but if not, they'll know how to arrangeatters." And really, during the awkward silence that ensued, thatnsufficiently patriotic person entered whom Anna Pavlovna had beenaiting for and wished to convert, and she, smiling and shaking ainger at Hippolyte, invited Prince Vasili to the table and bringingim two candles and the manuscript begged him to begin. Everyoneecame silent.
	"Most Gracious Sovereign and Emperor! " Prince Vasili sternlyeclaimed, looking round at his audience as if to inquire whethernyone had anything to say to the contrary. But no one saidnything. "Moscow, our ancient capital, the New Jerusalem, receiveser Christ"- he placed a sudden emphasis on the word her- "as a mothereceives her zealous sons into her arms, and through the gatheringists, foreseeing the brilliant glory of thy rule, sings inxultation, 'Hosanna, blessed is he that cometh!'"
	Prince Vasili pronounced these last words in a tearful voice.
	Bilibin attentively examined his nails, and many of those presentppeared intimidated, as if asking in what they were to blame. Annaavlovna whispered the next words in advance, like an old womanuttering the prayer at Communion: "Let the bold and insolentoliath..." she whispered.
	Prince Vasili continued.
	"Let the bold and insolent Goliath from the borders of Francencompass the realms of Russia with death-bearing terrors; humbleaith, the sling of the Russian David, shall suddenly smite his headn his blood-thirsty pride. This icon of the Venerable Sergius, theervant of God and zealous champion of old of our country's weal, isffered to Your Imperial Majesty. I grieve that my waning strengthrevents rejoicing in the sight of your most gracious presence. Iaise fervent prayers to Heaven that the Almighty may exalt the racef the just, and mercifully fulfill the desires of Your Majesty."
	"What force! What a style!" was uttered in approval both of readernd of author.
	Animated by that address Anna Pavlovna's guests talked for a longime of the state of the fatherland and offered various conjectures aso the result of the battle to be fought in a few days.
	"You will see," said Anna Pavlovna, "that tomorrow, on the Emperor'sirthday, we shall receive news. I have a favorable presentiment!"BK12|CH2
	CHAPTER II
	Anna Pavlovna's presentiment was in fact fulfilled. Next dayuring the service at the palace church in honor of the Emperor'sirthday, Prince Volkonski was called out of the church and received aispatch from Prince Kutuzov. It was Kutuzov's report, written fromatarinova on the day of the battle. Kutuzov wrote that the Russiansad not retreated a step, that the French losses were much heavierhan ours, and that he was writing in haste from the field of battleefore collecting full information. It followed that there must haveeen a victory. And at once, without leaving the church, thanks wereendered to the Creator for His help and for the victory.
	Anna Pavlovna's presentiment was justified, and all that morning aoyously festive mood reigned in the city. Everyone believed theictory to have been complete, and some even spoke of Napoleon'saving been captured, of his deposition, and of the choice of a newuler for France.
	It is very difficult for events to be reflected in their realtrength and completeness amid the conditions of court life and farrom the scene of action. General events involuntarily grouphemselves around some particular incident. So now the courtiers'leasure was based as much on the fact that the news had arrived onhe Emperor's birthday as on the fact of the victory itself. It wasike a successfully arranged surprise. Mention was made in Kutuzov'seport of the Russian losses, among which figured the names ofuchkov, Bagration, and Kutaysov. In the Petersburg world this sadide of the affair again involuntarily centered round a singlencident: Kutaysov's death. Everybody knew him, the Emperor liked him,nd he was young and interesting. That day everyone met with theords:
	"What a wonderful coincidence! Just during the service. But what aoss Kutaysov is! How sorry I am!"
	"What did I tell about Kutuzov?" Prince Vasili now said with arophet's pride. "I always said he was the only man capable ofefeating Napoleon."
	But next day no news arrived from the army and the public moodrew anxious. The courtiers suffered because of the suffering theuspense occasioned the Emperor.
	"Fancy the Emperor's position!" said they, and instead ofxtolling Kutuzov as they had done the day before, they condemnedim as the cause of the Emperor's anxiety. That day Prince Vasili noonger boasted of his protege Kutuzov, but remained silent when theommander in chief was mentioned. Moreover, toward evening, as ifverything conspired to make Petersburg society anxious and uneasy, terrible piece of news was added. Countess Helene Bezukhova haduddenly died of that terrible malady it had been so agreeable toention. Officially, at large gatherings, everyone said thatountess Bezukhova had died of a terrible attack of angina pectoris,ut in intimate circles details were mentioned of how the privatehysician of the Queen of Spain had prescribed small doses of aertain drug to produce a certain effect; but Helene, tortured byhe fact that the old count suspected her and that her husband to whomhe had written (that wretched, profligate Pierre) had not replied,ad suddenly taken a very large dose of the drug, and had died ingony before assistance could be rendered her. It was said that Princeasili and the old count had turned upon the Italian, but the latterad produced such letters from the unfortunate deceased that theyad immediately let the matter drop.
	Talk in general centered round three melancholy facts: the Emperor'sack of news, the loss of Kutuzov, and the death of Helene.
	On the third day after Kutuzov's report a country gentlemanrrived from Moscow, and news of the surrender of Moscow to the Frenchpread through the whole town. This was terrible! What a positionor the Emperor to be in! Kutuzov was a traitor, and Prince Vasiliuring the visits of condolence paid to him on the occasion of hisaughter's death said of Kutuzov, whom he had formerly praised (it wasxcusable for him in his grief to forget what he had said), that itas impossible to expect anything else from a blind and depraved oldan.
	"I only wonder that the fate of Russia could have been entrustedo such a man."
	As long as this news remained unofficial it was possible to doubtt, but the next day the following communication was received fromount Rostopchin:
	Prince Kutuzov's adjutant has brought me a letter in which heemands police officers to guide the army to the Ryazan road. Herites that he is regretfully abandoning Moscow. Sire! Kutuzov'sction decides the fate of the capital and of your empire! Russia willhudder to learn of the abandonment of the city in which her greatnesss centered and in which lie the ashes of your ancestors! I shallollow the army. I have had everything removed, and it only remainsor me to weep over the fate of my fatherland.
	On receiving this dispatch the Emperor sent Prince Volkonski toutuzov with the following rescript:
	Prince Michael Ilarionovich! Since the twenty-ninth of August I haveeceived no communication from you, yet on the first of September Ieceived from the commander in chief of Moscow, via Yaroslavl, the sadews that you, with the army, have decided to abandon Moscow. Youan yourself imagine the effect this news has had on me, and yourilence increases my astonishment. I am sending this bydjutant-General Prince Volkonski, to hear from you the situation ofhe army and the reasons that have induced you to take this melancholyecision.BK12|CH3
	CHAPTER III
	Nine days after the abandonment of Moscow, a messenger fromutuzov reached Petersburg with the official announcement of thatvent. This messenger was Michaud, a Frenchman who did not knowussian, but who was quoique etranger, russe de coeur et d'ame,* as heaid of himself.
	*Though a foreigner, Russian in heart and soul.
	The Emperor at once received this messenger in his study at thealace on Stone Island. Michaud, who had never seen Moscow beforehe campaign and who did not know Russian, yet felt deeply moved (ase wrote) when he appeared before notre tres gracieux souverain*ith the news of the burning of Moscow, dont les flammes eclairaienta route.*[2]
	*Our most gracious sovereign.
	*[2] Whose flames illumined his route.
	Though the source of M. Michaud's chagrin must have been differentrom that which caused Russians to grieve, he had such a sad face whenhown into the Emperor's study that the latter at once asked:
	"Have you brought me sad news, Colonel?"
	"Very sad, sire," replied Michaud, lowering his eyes with a sigh.The abandonment of Moscow."
	"Have they surrendered my ancient capital without a battle?" askedhe Emperor quickly, his face suddenly flushing.
	Michaud respectfully delivered the message Kutuzov had entrustedo him, which was that it had been impossible to fight beforeoscow, and that as the only remaining choice was between losing thermy as well as Moscow, or losing Moscow alone, the field marshalad to choose the latter.
	The Emperor listened in silence, not looking at Michaud.
	"Has the enemy entered the city?" he asked.
	"Yes, sire, and Moscow is now in ashes. I left it all in flames,"eplied Michaud in a decided tone, but glancing at the Emperor heas frightened by what he had done.
	The Emperor began to breathe heavily and rapidly, his lower liprembled, and tears instantly appeared in his fine blue eyes.
	But this lasted only a moment. He suddenly frowned, as if blamingimself for his weakness, and raising his head addressed Michaud in firm voice:
	"I see, Colonel, from all that is happening, that Providenceequires great sacrifices of us... I am ready to submit myself inll things to His will; but tell me, Michaud, how did you leave thermy when it saw my ancient capital abandoned without a battle? Didou not notice discouragement?..."
	Seeing that his most gracious ruler was calm once more, Michaud alsorew calm, but was not immediately ready to reply to the Emperor'sirect and relevant question which required a direct answer.
	"Sire, will you allow me to speak frankly as befits a loyaloldier?" he asked to gain time.
	"Colonel, I always require it," replied the Emperor. "Concealothing from me, I wish to know absolutely how things are."
	"Sire!" said Michaud with a subtle, scarcely perceptible smile onis lips, having now prepared a well-phrased reply, "sire, I lefthe whole army, from its chiefs to the lowest soldier, withoutxception in desperate and agonized terror..."
	"How is that?" the Emperor interrupted him, frowning sternly. "Wouldisfortune make my Russians lose heart?... Never!"
	Michaud had only waited for this to bring out the phrase he hadrepared.
	"Sire," he said, with respectful playfulness, "they are onlyfraid lest Your Majesty, in the goodness of your heart, shouldllow yourself to be persuaded to make peace. They are burning for theombat," declared this representative of the Russian nation, "and torove to Your Majesty by the sacrifice of their lives how devoted theyre...."
	"Ah!" said the Emperor reassured, and with a kindly gleam in hisyes, he patted Michaud on the shoulder. "You set me at ease,olonel."
	He bent his head and was silent for some time.
	"Well, then, go back to the army," he said, drawing himself up tois full height and addressing Michaud with a gracious and majesticesture, "and tell our brave men and all my good subjects wherever youo that when I have not a soldier left I shall put myself at theead of my beloved nobility and my good peasants and so use the lastesources of my empire. It still offers me more than my enemiesuppose," said the Emperor growing more and more animated; "but shouldt ever be ordained by Divine Providence," he continued, raising toeaven his fine eyes shining with emotion, "that my dynasty shouldease to reign on the throne of my ancestors, then after exhaustingll the means at my command, I shall let my beard grow to here" (heointed halfway down his chest) "and go and eat potatoes with theeanest of my peasants, rather than sign the disgrace of my countrynd of my beloved people whose sacrifices I know how to appreciate."
	Having uttered these words in an agitated voice the Emperor suddenlyurned away as if to hide from Michaud the tears that rose to hisyes, and went to the further end of his study. Having stood there aew moments, he strode back to Michaud and pressed his arm below thelbow with a vigorous movement. The Emperor's mild and handsome faceas flushed and his eyes gleamed with resolution and anger.
	"Colonel Michaud, do not forget what I say to you here, perhaps weay recall it with pleasure someday... Napoleon or I," said themperor, touching his breast. "We can no longer both reign together. Iave learned to know him, and he will not deceive me any more...."
	And the Emperor paused, with a frown.
	When he heard these words and saw the expression of firmesolution in the Emperor's eyes, Michaud- quoique etranger, russee coeur et d'ame- at that solemn moment felt himself enraptured byll that he had heard (as he used afterwards to say), and gavexpression to his own feelings and those of the Russian people whoseepresentative he considered himself to be, in the following words:
	"Sire!" said he, "Your Majesty is at this moment signing the gloryf the nation and the salvation of Europe!"
	With an inclination of the head the Emperor dismissed him.BK12|CH4
	CHAPTER IV
	It is natural for us who were not living in those days to imaginehat when half Russia had been conquered and the inhabitants wereiceing to distant provinces, and one levy after another was beingaised for the defense of the fatherland, all Russians from thereatest to the least were solely engaged in sacrificing themselves,aving their fatherland, or weeping over its downfall. The tales andescriptions of that time without exception speak only of theelf-sacrifice, patriotic devotion, despair, grief, and the heroism ofhe Russians. But it was not really so. It appears so to us because weee only the general historic interest of that time and do not see allhe personal human interests that people had. Yet in reality thoseersonal interests of the moment so much transcend the generalnterests that they always prevent the public interest from being feltr even noticed. Most of the people at that time paid no attentiono the general progress of events but were guided only by theirrivate interests, and they were the very people whose activities athat period were most useful.
	Those who tried to understand the general course of events and toake part in it by self-sacrifice and heroism were the most uselessembers of society, they saw everything upside down, and all theyid for the common good turned out to be useless and foolish- likeierre's and Mamonov's regiments which looted Russian villages, andhe lint the young ladies prepared and that never reached the wounded,nd so on. Even those, fond of intellectual talk and of expressingheir feelings, who discussed Russia's position at the timenvoluntarily introduced into their conversation either a shade ofretense and falsehood or useless condemnation and anger directedgainst people accused of actions no one could possibly be guiltyf. In historic events the rule forbidding us to eat of the fruit ofhe Tree of Knowledge is specially applicable. Only unconscious actionears fruit, and he who plays a part in an historic event nevernderstands its significance. If he tries to realize it his effortsre fruitless.
	The more closely a man was engaged in the events then taking placen Russia the less did he realize their significance. In Petersburgnd in the provinces at a distance from Moscow, ladies, andentlemen in militia uniforms, wept for Russia and its ancient capitalnd talked of self-sacrifice and so on; but in the army whichetired beyond Moscow there was little talk or thought of Moscow,nd when they caught sight of its burned ruins no one swore to bevenged on the French, but they thought about their next pay, theirext quarters, of Matreshka the vivandiere, and like matters.
	As the war had caught him in the service, Nicholas Rostov took alose and prolonged part in the defense of his country, but did soasually, without any aim at self-sacrifice, and he therefore lookedt what was going on in Russia without despair and without dismallyacking his brains over it. Had he been asked what he thought of thetate of Russia, he would have said that it was not his business tohink about it, that Kutuzov and others were there for that purpose,ut that he had heard that the regiments were to be made up to theirull strength, that fighting would probably go on for a long time yet,nd that things being so it was quite likely he might be in command of regiment in a couple of years' time.
	As he looked at the matter in this way, he learned that he was beingent to Voronezh to buy remounts for his division, not only withoutegret at being prevented from taking part in the coming battle, butith the greatest pleasure- which he did not conceal and which hisomrades fully understood.
	A few days before the battle of Borodino, Nicholas received theecessary money and warrants, and having sent some hussars on indvance, he set out with post horses for Voronezh.
	Only a man who has experienced it- that is, has passed some monthsontinuously in an atmosphere of campaigning and war- can understandhe delight Nicholas felt when he escaped from the region covered byhe army's foraging operations, provision trains, and hospitals. When-ree from soldiers, wagons, and the filthy traces of a camp- he sawillages with peasants and peasant women, gentlemen's countryouses, fields where cattle were grazing, posthouses withtationmasters asleep in them, he rejoiced as though seeing all thisor the first time. What for a long while specially surprised andelighted him were the women, young and healthy, without a dozenfficers making up to each of them; women, too, who were pleased andlattered that a passing officer should joke with them.
	In the highest spirits Nicholas arrived at night at a hotel inoronezh, ordered things he had long been deprived of in camp, andext day, very clean-shaven and in a full-dress uniform he had notorn for a long time, went to present himself to the authorities.
	The commander of the militia was a civilian general, an old manho was evidently pleased with his military designation and rank. Heeceived Nicholas brusquely (imagining this to be characteristicallyilitary) and questioned him with an important air, as ifonsidering the general progress of affairs and approving andisapproving with full right to do so. Nicholas was in such goodpirits that this merely amused him.
	From the commander of the militia he drove to the governor. Theovernor was a brisk little man, very simple and affable. He indicatedhe stud farms at which Nicholas might procure horses, recommendedo him a horse dealer in the town and a landowner fourteen miles outf town who had the best horses, and promised to assist him in everyay.
	"You are Count Ilya Rostov's son? My wife was a great friend of yourother's. We are at home on Thursdays- today is Thursday, so pleaseome and see us quite informally," said the governor, taking leavef him.
	Immediately on leaving the governor's, Nicholas hired post horsesnd, taking his squadron quartermaster with him, drove at a gallopo the landowner, fourteen miles away, who had the stud. Everythingeemed to him pleasant and easy during that first part of his stayn Voronezh and, as usually happens when a man is in a pleasanttate of mind, everything went well and easily.
	The landowner to whom Nicholas went was a bachelor, an oldavalryman, a horse fancier, a sportsman, the possessor of someentury-old brandy and some old Hungarian wine, who had a snuggeryhere he smoked, and who owned some splendid horses.
	In very few words Nicholas bought seventeen picked stallions for sixhousand rubles- to serve, as he said, as samples of his remounts.fter dining and taking rather too much of the Hungarian wine,icholas- having exchanged kisses with the landowner, with whom he waslready on the friendliest terms- galloped back over abominable roads,n the brightest frame of mind, continually urging on the driver so aso be in time for the governor's party.
	When he had changed, poured water over his head, and scentedimself, Nicholas arrived at the governor's rather late, but withhe phrase "better late than never" on his lips.
	It was not a ball, nor had dancing been announced, but everyone knewhat Catherine Petrovna would play valses and the ecossaise on thelavichord and that there would be dancing, and so everyone had comes to a ball.
	Provincial life in 1812 went on very much as usual, but with thisifference, that it was livelier in the towns in consequence of therrival of many wealthy families from Moscow, and as in everythinghat went on in Russia at that time a special recklessness wasoticeable, an "in for a penny, in for a pound- who cares?" spirit,nd the inevitable small talk, instead of turning on the weather andutual acquaintances, now turned on Moscow, the army, and Napoleon.
	The society gathered together at the governor's was the best inoronezh.
	There were a great many ladies and some of Nicholas' Moscowcquaintances, but there were no men who could at all vie with theavalier of St. George, the hussar remount officer, the good-naturednd well-bred Count Rostov. Among the men was an Italian prisoner,n officer of the French army; and Nicholas felt that the presencef that prisoner enhanced his own importance as a Russian hero. Thetalian was, as it were, a war trophy. Nicholas felt this, it seemedo him that everyone regarded the Italian in the same light, and hereated him cordially though with dignity and restraint.
	As soon as Nicholas entered in his hussar uniform, diffusinground him a fragrance of perfume and wine, and had uttered theords "better late than never" and heard them repeated several timesy others, people clustered around him; all eyes turned on him, and heelt at once that he had entered into his proper position in therovince- that of a universal favorite: a very pleasant position,nd intoxicatingly so after his long privations. At postingtations, at inns, and in the landowner's snuggery, maidservants hadeen flattered by his notice, and here too at the governor's partyhere were (as it seemed to Nicholas) an inexhaustible number ofretty young women, married and unmarried, impatiently awaiting hisotice. The women and girls flirted with him and, from the firstay, the people concerned themselves to get this fine youngaredevil of an hussar married and settled down. Among these was theovernor's wife herself, who welcomed Rostov as a near relative andalled him "Nicholas."
	Catherine Petrovna did actually play valses and the ecossaise, andancing began in which Nicholas still further captivated therovincial society by his agility. His particularly free manner ofancing even surprised them all. Nicholas was himself rather surprisedt the way he danced that evening. He had never danced like that inoscow and would even have considered such a very free and easy mannermproper and in bad form, but here he felt it incumbent on him tostonish them all by something unusual, something they would have toccept as the regular thing in the capital though new to them in therovinces.
	All the evening Nicholas paid attention to a blue-eyed, plump andleasing little blonde, the wife of one of the provincial officials.ith the naive conviction of young men in a merry mood that otheren's wives were created for them, Rostov did not leave the lady'side and treated her husband in a friendly and conspiratorial style,s if, without speaking of it, they knew how capitally Nicholas andhe lady would get on together. The husband, however, did not seemo share that conviction and tried to behave morosely with Rostov. Buthe latter's good-natured naivete was so boundless that sometimes evene involuntarily yielded to Nicholas' good humor. Toward the end ofhe evening, however, as the wife's face grew more flushed andnimated, the husband's became more and more melancholy and solemn, ashough there were but a given amount of animation between them ands the wife's share increased the husband's diminished.BK12|CH5
	CHAPTER V
	Nicholas sat leaning slightly forward in an armchair, bendinglosely over the blonde lady and paying her mythological complimentsith a smile that never left his face. Jauntily shifting theosition of his legs in their tight riding breeches, diffusing an odorf perfume, and admiring his partner, himself, and the fine outlinesf his legs in their well-fitting Hessian boots, Nicholas told thelonde lady that he wished to run away with a certain lady here inoronezh.
	"Which lady?"
	"A charming lady, a divine one. Her eyes" (Nicholas looked at hisartner) "are blue, her mouth coral and ivory; her figure" (he glancedt her shoulders) "like Diana's...."
	The husband came up and sullenly asked his wife what she was talkingbout.
	"Ah, Nikita Ivanych!" cried Nicholas, rising politely, and as ifishing Nikita Ivanych to share his joke, he began to tell him ofis intention to elope with a blonde lady.
	The husband smiled gloomily, the wife gaily. The governor'sood-natured wife came up with a look of disapproval.
	"Anna Ignatyevna wants to see you, Nicholas," said she,ronouncing the name so that Nicholas at once understood that Annagnatyevna was a very important person. "Come, Nicholas! You knowou let me call you so?"
	"Oh, yes, Aunt. Who is she?"
	"Anna Ignatyevna Malvintseva. She has heard from her niece how youescued her... Can you guess?"
	"I rescued such a lot of them!" said Nicholas.
	"Her niece, Princess Bolkonskaya. She is here in Voronezh with herunt. Oho! How you blush. Why, are...?"
	"Not a bit! Please don't, Aunt!"
	"Very well, very well!... Oh, what a fellow you are!"
	The governor's wife led him up to a tall and very stout old ladyith a blue headdress, who had just finished her game of cards withhe most important personages of the town. This was Malvintseva,rincess Mary's aunt on her mother's side, a rich, childless widow wholways lived in Voronezh. When Rostov approached her she wastanding settling up for the game. She looked at him and, screwingp her eyes sternly, continued to upbraid the general who had won fromer.
	"Very pleased, mon cher," she then said, holding out her hand toicholas. "Pray come and see me."
	After a few words about Princess Mary and her late father, whomalvintseva had evidently not liked, and having asked what Nicholasnew of Prince Andrew, who also was evidently no favorite of hers, themportant old lady dismissed Nicholas after repeating her invitationo come to see her.
	Nicholas promised to come and blushed again as he bowed. At theention of Princess Mary he experienced a feeling of shyness andven of fear, which he himself did not understand.
	When he had parted from Malvintseva Nicholas wished to return to theancing, but the governor's little wife placed her plump hand on hisleeve and, saying that she wanted to have a talk with him, led him toer sitting room, from which those who were there immediately withdrewo as not to be in her way.
	"Do you know, dear boy," began the governor's wife with a seriousxpression on her kind little face, "that really would be the matchor you: would you like me to arrange it?"
	"Whom do you mean, Aunt?" asked Nicholas.
	"I will make a match for you with the princess. Catherine Petrovnapeaks of Lily, but I say, no- the princess! Do you want me to dot? I am sure your mother will be grateful to me. What a charming girlhe is, really! And she is not at all so plain, either."
	"Not at all," replied Nicholas as if offended at the idea. "Asefits a soldier, Aunt, I don't force myself on anyone or refusenything," he said before he had time to consider what he was saying.
	"Well then, remember, this is not a joke!"
	"Of course not!"
	"Yes, yes," the governor's wife said as if talking to herself. "But,y dear boy, among other things you are too attentive to the other,he blonde. One is sorry for the husband, really...."
	"Oh no, we are good friends with him," said Nicholas in theimplicity of his heart; it did not enter his head that a pastime soleasant to himself might not be pleasant to someone else.
	"But what nonsense I have been saying to the governor's wife!"hought Nicholas suddenly at supper. "She will really begin to arrange match... and Soyna...?" And on taking leave of the governor'sife, when she again smilingly said to him, "Well then, remember!"e drew her aside.
	"But see here, to tell the truth, Aunt..."
	"What is it, my dear? Come, let's sit down here," said she.
	Nicholas suddenly felt a desire and need to tell his most intimatehoughts (which he would not have told to his mother, his sister, oris friend) to this woman who was almost a stranger. When hefterwards recalled that impulse to unsolicited and inexplicablerankness which had very important results for him, it seemed toim- as it seems to everyone in such cases- that it was merely someilly whim that seized him: yet that burst of frankness, together withther trifling events, had immense consequences for him and for allis family.
	"You see, Aunt, Mamma has long wanted me to marry an heiress, buthe very idea of marrying for money is repugnant to me."
	"Oh yes, I understand," said the governor's wife.
	"But Princess Bolkonskaya- that's another matter. I will tell youhe truth. In the first place I like her very much, I feel drawn toer; and then, after I met her under such circumstances- so strangely,he idea often occurred to me: 'This is fate.' Especially if youemember that Mamma had long been thinking of it; but I had neverappened to meet her before, somehow it had always happened that weid not meet. And as long as my sister Natasha was engaged to herrother it was of course out of the question for me to think ofarrying her. And it must needs happen that I should meet her justhen Natasha's engagement had been broken off... and thenverything... So you see... I never told this to anyone and neverill, only to you."
	The governor's wife pressed his elbow gratefully.
	"You know Sonya, my cousin? I love her, and promised to marry her,nd will do so.... So you see there can be no question about-" saidicholas incoherently and blushing.
	"My dear boy, what a way to look at it! You know Sonya has nothingnd you yourself say your Papa's affairs are in a very bad way. Andhat about your mother? It would kill her, that's one thing. Andhat sort of life would it be for Sonya- if she's a girl with a heart?our mother in despair, and you all ruined.... No, my dear, you andonya ought to understand that."
	Nicholas remained silent. It comforted him to hear these arguments.
	"All the same, Aunt, it is impossible," he rejoined with a sigh,fter a short pause. "Besides, would the princess have me? Andesides, she is now in mourning. How can one think of it!"
	"But you don't suppose I'm going to get you married at once? Theres always a right way of doing things," replied the governor's wife.
	"What a matchmaker you are, Aunt..." said Nicholas, kissing herlump little hand.BK12|CH6
	CHAPTER VI
	On reaching Moscow after her meeting with Rostov, Princess Maryad found her nephew there with his tutor, and a letter from Princendrew giving her instructions how to get to her Aunt Malvintseva atoronezh. That feeling akin to temptation which had tormented heruring her father's illness, since his death, and especially since hereeting with Rostov was smothered by arrangements for the journey,nxiety about her brother, settling in a new house, meeting neweople, and attending to her nephew's education. She was sad. Now,fter a month passed in quiet surroundings, she felt more and moreeeply the loss of her father which was associated in her mind withhe ruin of Russia. She was agitated and incessantly tortured by thehought of the dangers to which her brother, the only intimateerson now remaining to her, was exposed. She was worried too abouter nephew's education for which she had always felt herselfncompetent, but in the depths of her soul she felt at peace- aeace arising from consciousness of having stifled those personalreams and hopes that had been on the point of awakening within hernd were related to her meeting with Rostov.
	The day after her party the governor's wife came to seealvintseva and, after discussing her plan with the aunt, remarkedhat though under present circumstances a formal betrothal was, ofourse, not to be thought of, all the same the young people might berought together and could get to know one another. Malvintsevaxpressed approval, and the governor's wife began to speak of Rostovn Mary's presence, praising him and telling how he had blushed whenrincess Mary's name was mentioned. But Princess Mary experienced aainful rather than a joyful feeling- her mental tranquillity wasestroyed, and desires, doubts, self-reproach, and hopes reawoke.
	During the two days that elapsed before Rostov called, Princess Maryontinually thought of how she ought to behave to him. First sheecided not to come to the drawing room when he called to see herunt- that it would not be proper for her, in her deep mourning, toeceive visitors; then she thought this would be rude after what head done for her; then it occurred to her that her aunt and theovernor's wife had intentions concerning herself and Rostov- theirooks and words at times seemed to confirm this supposition- thenhe told herself that only she, with her sinful nature, could thinkhis of them: they could not forget that situated as she was, whiletill wearing deep mourning, such matchmaking would be an insult toer and to her father's memory. Assuming that she did go down to seeim, Princess Mary imagined the words he would say to her and what sheould say to him, and these words sometimes seemed undeservedly coldnd then to mean too much. More than anything she feared lest theonfusion she felt might overwhelm her and betray her as soon as sheaw him.
	But when on Sunday after church the footman announced in the drawingoom that Count Rostov had called, the princess showed no confusion,nly a slight blush suffused her cheeks and her eyes lit up with a newnd radiant light.
	"You have met him, Aunt?" said she in a calm voice, unable herselfo understand that she could be outwardly so calm and natural.
	When Rostov entered the room, the princess dropped her eyes for annstant, as if to give the visitor time to greet her aunt, and thenust as Nicholas turned to her she raised her head and met his lookith shining eyes. With a movement full of dignity and grace shealf rose with a smile of pleasure, held out her slender, delicateand to him, and began to speak in a voice in which for the first timeew deep womanly notes vibrated. Mademoiselle Bourienne, who was inhe drawing room, looked at Princess Mary in bewildered surprise.erself a consummate coquette, she could not have maneuvered better oneeting a man she wished to attract.
	"Either black is particularly becoming to her or she really hasreatly improved without my having noticed it. And above all, whatact and grace!" thought Mademoiselle Bourienne.
	Had Princess Mary been capable of reflection at that moment, sheould have been more surprised than Mademoiselle Bourienne at thehange that had taken place in herself. From the moment she recognizedhat dear, loved face, a new life force took possession of her andompelled her to speak and act apart from her own will. From theime Rostov entered, her face became suddenly transformed. It was asf a light had been kindled in a carved and painted lantern and thentricate, skillful, artistic work on its sides, that previouslyeemed dark, coarse, and meaningless, was suddenly shown up innexpected and striking beauty. For the first time all that pure,piritual, inward travail through which she had lived appeared onhe surface. All her inward labor, her dissatisfaction with herself,er sufferings, her strivings after goodness, her meekness, love,nd self-sacrifice- all this now shone in those radiant eyes, in herelicate smile, and in every trait of her gentle face.
	Rostov saw all this as clearly as if he had known her whole life. Heelt that the being before him was quite different from, and betterhan, anyone he had met before, and above all better than himself.
	Their conversation was very simple and unimportant. They spoke ofhe war, and like everyone else unconsciously exaggerated their sorrowbout it; they spoke of their last meeting- Nicholas trying tohange the subject- they talked of the governor's kind wife, oficholas' relations, and of Princess Mary's.
	She did not talk about her brother, diverting the conversation asoon as her aunt mentioned Andrew. Evidently she could speak ofussia's misfortunes with a certain artificiality, but her brother wasoo near her heart and she neither could nor would speak lightly ofim. Nicholas noticed this, as he noticed every shade of Princessary's character with an observation unusual to him, and everythingonfirmed his conviction that she was a quite unusual andxtraordinary being. Nicholas blushed and was confused when peoplepoke to him about the princess (as she did when he was mentioned) andven when he thought of her, but in her presence he felt quite atase, and said not at all what he had prepared, but what, quiteppropriately, occurred to him at the moment.
	When a pause occurred during his short visit, Nicholas, as issual when there are children, turned to Prince Andrew's little son,aressing him and asking whether he would like to be an hussar. Heook the boy on his knee, played with him, and looked round atrincess Mary. With a softened, happy, timid look she watched theoy she loved in the arms of the man she loved. Nicholas alsooticed that look and, as if understanding it, flushed with pleasurend began to kiss the boy with good natured playfulness.
	As she was in mourning Princess Mary did not go out into society,nd Nicholas did not think it the proper thing to visit her again; butll the same the governor's wife went on with her matchmaking, passingn to Nicholas the flattering things Princess Mary said of him andice versa, and insisting on his declaring himself to Princess Mary.or this purpose she arranged a meeting between the young people athe bishop's house before Mass.
	Though Rostov told the governeor's wife that he would not make anyeclaration to Princess Mary, he promised to go.
	As at Tilsit Rostov had not allowed himself to doubt that whatverybody considered right was right, so now, after a short butincere struggle between his effort to arrange his life by his ownense of justice, and in obedient submission to circumstances, hehose the latter and yielded to the power he felt irresistiblyarrying him he knew not where. He knew that after his promise toonya it would be what he deemed base to declare his feelings torincess Mary. And he knew that he would never act basely. But he alsonew (or rather felt at the bottom of his heart) that by resigningimself now to the force of circumstances and to those who wereuiding him, he was not only doing nothing wrong, but was doingomething very important- more important than anything he had everone in his life.
	After meeting Princess Mary, though the course of his life went onxternally as before, all his former amusements lost their charm forim and he often thought about her. But he never thought about hers he had thought of all the young ladies without exception whom head met in society, nor as he had for a long time, and at one timeapturously, thought about Sonya. He had pictured each of thoseoung ladies as almost all honest-hearted young men do, that is, as possible wife, adapting her in his imagination to all the conditionsf married life: a white dressing gown, his wife at the tea table, hisife's carriage, little ones, Mamma and Papa, their relations toer, and so on- and these pictures of the future had given himleasure. But with Princess Mary, to whom they were trying to getim engaged, he could never picture anything of future married life.f he tried, his pictures seemed incongruous and false. It made himfraid.BK12|CH7
	CHAPTER VII
	The dreadful news of the battle of Borodino, of our losses in killednd wounded, and the still more terrible news of the loss of Moscoweached Voronezh in the middle of September. Princess Mary, havingearned of her brother's wound only from the Gazette and having noefinite news of him, prepared (so Nicholas heard, he had not seen hergain himself) to set off in search of Prince Andrew.
	When he received the news of the battle of Borodino and thebandonment of Moscow, Rostov was not seized with despair, anger,he desire for vengeance, or any feeling of that kind, butverything in Voronezh suddenly seemed to him dull and tiresome, ande experienced an indefinite feeling of shame and awkwardness. Theonversations he heard seemed to him insincere; he did not know how toudge all these affairs and felt that only in the regiment wouldverything again become clear to him. He made haste to finish buyinghe horses, and often became unreasonably angry with his servant andquadron quartermaster.
	A few days before his departure a special thanksgiving, at whichicholas was present, was held in the cathedral for the Russianictory. He stood a little behind the governor and held himself withilitary decorum through the service, meditating on a great variety ofubjects. When the service was over the governor's wife beckoned himo her.
	"Have you seen the princess?" she asked, indicating with aovement of her head a lady standing on the opposite side, beyondhe choir.
	Nicholas immediately recognized Princess Mary not so much by therofile he saw under her bonnet as by the feeling of solicitude,imidity, and pity that immediately overcame him. Princess Mary,vidently engrossed by her thoughts, was crossing herself for the lastime before leaving the church.
	Nicholas looked at her face with surprise. It was the same face head seen before, there was the same general expression of refined,nner, spiritual labor, but now it was quite differently lit up. Thereas a pathetic expression of sorrow, prayer, and hope in it. As hadccurred before when she was present, Nicholas went up to herithout waiting to be prompted by the governor's wife and not askingimself whether or not it was right and proper to address her heren church, and told her he had heard of her trouble and sympathizedith his whole soul. As soon as she heard his voice a vivid glowindled in her face, lighting up both her sorrow and her joy.
	"There is one thing I wanted to tell you, Princess," said Rostov.It is that if your brother, Prince Andrew Nikolievich, were notiving, it would have been at once announced in the Gazette, as hes a colonel."
	The princess looked at him, not grasping what he was saying, butheered by the expression of regretful sympathy on his face.
	"And I have known so many cases of a splinter wound" (the Gazetteaid it was a shell) "either proving fatal at once or being verylight," continued Nicholas. "We must hope for the best, and I amure..."
	Princess Mary interrupted him.
	"Oh, that would be so dread..." she began and, prevented bygitation from finishing, she bent her head with a movement asraceful as everything she did in his presence and, looking up atim gratefully, went out, following her aunt.
	That evening Nicholas did not go out, but stayed at home to settleome accounts with the horse dealers. When he had finished thatusiness it was already too late to go anywhere but still too early too to bed, and for a long time he paced up and down the room,eflecting on his life, a thing he rarely did.
	Princess Mary had made an agreeable impression on him when he hadet her in Smolensk province. His having encountered her in suchxceptional circumstances, and his mother having at one time mentioneder to him as a good match, had drawn his particular attention to her.hen he met her again in Voronezh the impression she made on him wasot merely pleasing but powerful. Nicholas had been struck by theeculiar moral beauty he observed in her at this time. He was,owever, preparing to go away and it had not entered his head toegret that he was thus depriving himself of chances of meeting her.ut that day's encounter in church had, he felt, sunk deeper thanas desirable for his peace of mind. That pale, sad, refined face,hat radiant look, those gentle graceful gestures, and especiallyhe deep and tender sorrow expressed in all her features agitatedim and evoked his sympathy. In men Rostov could not bear to see thexpression of a higher spiritual life (that was why he did not likerince Andrew) and he referred to it contemptuously as philosophynd dreaminess, but in Princess Mary that very sorrow which revealedhe depth of a whole spiritual world foreign to him was anrresistible attraction.
	"She must be a wonderful woman. A real angel!" he said to himself.Why am I not free? Why was I in such a hurry with Sonya?" And henvoluntarily compared the two: the lack of spirituality in the onend the abundance of it in the other- a spirituality he himself lackednd therefore valued most highly. He tried to picture what wouldappen were he free. How he would propose to her and how she wouldecome his wife. But no, he could not imagine that. He felt awed,nd no clear picture presented itself to his mind. He had long agoictured to himself a future with Sonya, and that was all clear andimple just because it had all been thought out and he knew allhere was in Sonya, but it was impossible to picture a future withrincess Mary, because he did not understand her but simply loved her.
	Reveries about Sonya had had something merry and playful in them,ut to dream of Princess Mary was always difficult and a littlerightening.
	"How she prayed!" he thought. "It was plain that her whole soulas in her prayer. Yes, that was the prayer that moves mountains,nd I am sure her prayer will be answered. Why don't I pray for what Iant?" he suddenly thought. "What do I want? To be free, released fromonya... She was right," he thought, remembering what the governor'sife had said: "Nothing but misfortune can come of marrying Sonya.uddles, grief for Mamma... business difficulties... muddles, terribleuddles! Besides, I don't love her- not as I should. O, God! releasee from this dreadful, inextricable position!" he suddenly began toray. "Yes, prayer can move mountains, but one must have faith and notray as Natasha and I used to as children, that the snow might turnnto sugar- and then run out into the yard to see whether it hadone so. No, but I am not praying for trifles now," he thought as heut his pipe down in a corner, and folding his hands placed himselfefore the icon. Softened by memories of Princess Mary he began toray as he had not done for a long time. Tears were in his eyes and inis throat when the door opened and Lavrushka came in with someapers.
	"Blockhead! Why do you come in without being called?" criedicholas, quickly changing his attitude.
	"From the governor," said Lavrushka in a sleepy voice. "A courieras arrived and there's a letter for you."
	"Well, all right, thanks. You can go!"
	Nicholas took the two letters, one of which was from his mothernd the other from Sonya. He recognized them by the handwriting andpened Sonya's first. He had read only a few lines when he turned palend his eyes opened wide with fear and joy.
	"No, it's not possible!" he cried aloud.
	Unable to sit still he paced up and down the room holding the letternd reading it. He glanced through it, then read it again, and thengain, and standing still in the middle of the room he raised hishoulders, stretching out his hands, with his mouth wide open andis eyes fixed. What he had just been praying for with confidence thatod would hear him had come to pass; but Nicholas was as muchstonished as if it were something extraordinary and unexpected, ands if the very fact that it had happened so quickly proved that it hadot come from God to whom he had prayed, but by some ordinaryoincidence.
	This unexpected and, as it seemed to Nicholas, quite voluntaryetter from Sonya freed him from the knot that fettered him and fromhich there had seemed no escape. She wrote that the lastnfortunate events- the loss of almost the whole of the Rostovs'oscow property- and the countess' repeatedly expressed wish thaticholas should marry Princess Bolkonskaya, together with hisilence and coldness of late, had all combined to make her decide toelease him from his promise and set him completely free.
	It would be too painful to me to think that I might be a cause oforrow or discord in the family that has been so good to me (sherote), and my love has no aim but the happiness of those I love;o, Nicholas, I beg you to consider yourself free, and to be assuredhat, in spite of everything, no one can love you more than does
	                                                 Your Sonya
	Both letters were written from Troitsa. The other, from theountess, described their last days in Moscow, their departure, theire, and the destruction of all their property. In this letter theountess also mentioned that Prince Andrew was among the woundedraveling with them; his state was very critical, but the doctoraid there was now more hope. Sonya and Natasha were nursing him.
	Next day Nicholas took his mother's letter and went to seerincess Mary. Neither he nor she said a word about what "Natashaursing him" might mean, but thanks to this letter Nicholas suddenlyecame almost as intimate with the princess as if they were relations.
	The following day he saw Princess Mary off on her journey toaroslavl, and a few days later left to rejoin his regiment.BK12|CH8
	CHAPTER VIII
	Sonya's letter written from Troitsa, which had come as an answero Nicholas' prayer, was prompted by this: the thought of gettingicholas married to an heiress occupied the old countess' mind morend more. She knew that Sonya was the chief obstacle to thisappening, and Sonya's life in the countess' house had grown hardernd harder, especially after they had received a letter fromicholas telling of his meeting with Princess Mary in Bogucharovo. Theountess let no occasion slip of making humiliating or cruel allusionso Sonya.
	But a few days before they left Moscow, moved and excited by allhat was going on, she called Sonya to her and, instead of reproachingnd making demands on her, tearfully implored her to sacrifice herselfnd repay all that the family had done for her by breaking off herngagement with Nicholas.
	"I shall not be at peace till you promise me this."
	Sonya burst into hysterical tears and replied through her sobshat she would do anything and was prepared for anything, but gaveo actual promise and could not bring herself to decide to do what wasemanded of her. She must sacrifice herself for the family that hadeared and brought her up. To sacrifice herself for others was Sonya'sabit. Her position in the house was such that only by sacrifice couldhe show her worth, and she was accustomed to this and loved doing it.ut in all her former acts of self-sacrifice she had been happilyonscious that they raised her in her own esteem and in that ofthers, and so made her more worthy of Nicholas whom she loved morehan anything in the world. But now they wanted her to sacrifice theery thing that constituted the whole reward for her self-sacrificend the whole meaning of her life. And for the first time she feltitterness against those who had been her benefactors only toorture her the more painfully; she felt jealous of Natasha who hadever experienced anything of this sort, had never needed to sacrificeerself, but made others sacrifice themselves for her and yet waseloved by everybody. And for the first time Sonya felt that out ofer pure, quiet love for Nicholas a passionate feeling was beginningo grow up which was stronger than principle, virtue, or religion.nder the influence of this feeling Sonya, whose life of dependencead taught her involuntarily to be secretive, having answered theountess in vague general terms, avoided talking with her and resolvedo wait till she should see Nicholas, not in order to set him free butn the contrary at that meeting to bind him to her forever.
	The bustle and terror of the Rostovs' last days in Moscow stifledhe gloomy thoughts that oppressed Sonya. She was glad to findscape from them in practical activity. But when she heard of Princendrew's presence in their house, despite her sincere pity for him andor Natasha, she was seized by a joyful and superstitious feeling thatod did not intend her to be separated from Nicholas. She knew thatatasha loved no one but Prince Andrew and had never ceased to loveim. She knew that being thrown together again under such terribleircumstances they would again fall in love with one another, and thaticholas would then not be able to marry Princess Mary as they woulde within the prohibited degrees of affinity. Despite all the terrorf what had happened during those last days and during the firstays of their journey, this feeling that Providence was intervening iner personal affairs cheered Sonya.
	At the Troitsa monastery the Rostovs first broke their journey for ahole day.
	Three large rooms were assigned to them in the monastery hostelry,ne of which was occupied by Prince Andrew. The wounded man was muchetter that day and Natasha was sitting with him. In the next room sathe count and countess respectfully conversing with the prior, who wasalling on them as old acquaintances and benefactors of the monastery.onya was there too, tormented by curiosity as to what Prince Andrewnd Natasha were talking about. She heard the sound of their voiceshrough the door. That door opened and Natasha came out, lookingxcited. Not noticing the monk, who had risen to greet her and wasrawing back the wide sleeve on his right arm, she went up to Sonyand took her hand.
	"Natasha, what are you about? Come here!" said the countess.
	Natasha went up to the monk for his blessing, and advised her toray for aid to God and His saint.
	As soon as the prior withdrew, Natasha took her friend by the handnd went with her into the unoccupied room.
	"Sonya, will he live?" she asked. "Sonya, how happy I am, and hownhappy!... Sonya, dovey, everything is as it used to be. If only heives! He cannot... because... because... of" and Natasha burst intoears.
	"Yes! I knew it! Thank God!" murmured Sonya. "He will live."
	Sonya was not less agitated than her friend by the latter's fear andrief and by her own personal feelings which she shared with no one.obbing, she kissed and comforted Natasha. "If only he lives!" shehought. Having wept, talked, and wiped away their tears, the tworiends went together to Prince Andrew's door. Natasha opened itautiously and glanced into the room, Sonya standing beside her at thealf-open door.
	Prince Andrew was lying raised high on three pillows. His paleace was calm, his eyes closed, and they could see his regularreathing.
	"O, Natasha!" Sonya suddenly almost screamed, catching herompanion's arm and stepping back from the door.
	"What? What is it?" asked Natasha.
	"It's that, that..." said Sonya, with a white face and tremblingips.
	Natasha softly closed the door and went with Sonya to the window,ot yet understanding what the latter was telling her.
	"You remember," said Sonya with a solemn and frightenedxpression. "You remember when I looked in the mirror for you... attradnoe at Christmas? Do you remember what I saw?"
	"Yes, yes!" cried Natasha opening her eyes wide, and vaguelyecalling that Sonya had told her something about Prince Andrew whomhe had seen lying down.
	"You remember?" Sonya went on. "I saw it then and told everybody,ou and Dunyasha. I saw him lying on a bed," said she, making aesture with her hand and a lifted finger at each detail, "and that head his eyes closed and was covered just with a pink quilt, and thatis hands were folded," she concluded, convincing herself that theetails she had just seen were exactly what she had seen in theirror.
	She had in fact seen nothing then but had mentioned the firsthing that came into her head, but what she had invented then seemedo her now as real as any other recollection. She not onlyemembered what she had then said- that he turned to look at her andmiled and was covered with something red- but was firmly convincedhat she had then seen and said that he was covered with a pinkuilt and that his eyes were closed.
	"Yes, yes, it really was pink!" cried Natasha, who now thought sheoo remembered the word pink being used, and saw in this the mostxtraordinary and mysterious part of the prediction.
	"But what does it mean?" she added meditatively.
	"Oh, I don't know, it is all so strange," replied Sonya, clutchingt her head.
	A few minutes later Prince Andrew rang and Natasha went to him,ut Sonya, feeling unusually excited and touched, remained at theindow thinking about the strangeness of what had occurred.
	They had an opportunity that day to send letters to the army, andhe countess was writing to her son.
	"Sonya!" said the countess, raising her eyes from her letter aser niece passed, "Sonya, won't you write to Nicholas?" She spoke in aoft, tremulous voice, and in the weary eyes that looked over herpectacles Sonya read all that the countess meant to convey with theseords. Those eyes expressed entreaty, shame at having to ask, fearf a refusal, and readiness for relentless hatred in case of suchefusal.
	Sonya went up to the countess and, kneeling down, kissed her hand.
	"Yes, Mamma, I will write," said she.
	Sonya was softened, excited, and touched by all that had occurredhat day, especially by the mysterious fulfillment she had just seenf her vision. Now that she knew that the renewal of Natasha'selations with Prince Andrew would prevent Nicholas from marryingrincess Mary, she was joyfully conscious of a return of thatelf-sacrificing spirit in which she was accustomed to live andoved to live. So with a joyful consciousness of performing aagnanimous deed- interrupted several times by the tears that dimmeder velvety black eyes- she wrote that touching letter the arrivalf which had so amazed Nicholas.BK12|CH9
	CHAPTER IX
	The officer and soldiers who had arrested Pierre treated him withostility but yet with respect, in the guardhouse to which he wasaken. In their attitude toward him could still be felt bothncertainty as to who he might be- perhaps a very important person-nd hostility as a result of their recent personal conflict with him.
	But when the guard was relieved next morning, Pierre felt that forhe new guard- both officers and men- he was not as interesting ase had been to his captors; and in fact the guard of the second dayid not recognize in this big, stout man in a peasant coat theigorous person who had fought so desperately with the marauder andhe convoy and had uttered those solemn words about saving a child;hey saw in him only No. 17 of the captured Russians, arrested andetained for some reason by order of the Higher Command. If theyoticed anything remarkable about Pierre, it was only his unabashed,editative concentration and thoughtfulness, and the way he spokerench, which struck them as surprisingly good. In spite of this heas placed that day with the other arrested suspects, as theeparate room he had occupied was required by an officer.
	All the Russians confined with Pierre were men of the lowest classnd, recognizing him as a gentleman, they all avoided him, morespecially as he spoke French. Pierre felt sad at hearing themaking fun of him.
	That evening he learned that all these prisoners (he, probably,mong them) were to be tried for incendiarism. On the third day he wasaken with the others to a house where a French general with a whiteustache sat with two colonels and other Frenchmen with scarves onheir arms. With the precision and definiteness customary inddressing prisoners, and which is supposed to preclude human frailty,ierre like the others was questioned as to who he was, where he hadeen, with what object, and so on.
	These questions, like questions put at trials generally, left thessence of the matter aside, shut out the possibility of thatssence's being revealed, and were designed only to form a channelhrough which the judges wished the answers of the accused to flowo as to lead to the desired result, namely a conviction. As soon asierre began to say anything that did not fit in with that aim, thehannel was removed and the water could flow to waste. Pierre felt,oreover, what the accused always feel at their trial, perplexity aso why these questions were put to him. He had a feeling that it wasnly out of condescension or a kind of civility that this device oflacing a channel was employed. He knew he was in these men's power,hat only by force had they brought him there, that force alone gavehem the right to demand answers to their questions, and that the solebject of that assembly was to inculpate him. And so, as they hadhe power and wish to inculpate him, this expedient of an inquirynd trial seemed unnecessary. It was evident that any answer wouldead to conviction. When asked what he was doing when he was arrested,ierre replied in a rather tragic manner that he was restoring tots parents a child he had saved from the flames. Why had he foughthe marauder? Pierre answered that he "was protecting a woman," andhat "to protect a woman who was being insulted was the duty ofvery man; that..." They interrupted him, for this was not to theoint. Why was he in the yard of a burning house where witnesses hadeen him? He replied that he had gone out to see what was happening inoscow. Again they interrupted him: they had not asked where he wasoing, but why he was found near the fire? Who was he? they asked,epeating their first question, which he had declined to answer. Againe replied that he could not answer it.
	"Put that down, that's bad... very bad," sternly remarked theeneral with the white mustache and red flushed face.
	On the fourth day fires broke out on the Zubovski rampart.
	Pierre and thirteen others were moved to the coach house of aerchant's house near the Crimean bridge. On his way through thetreets Pierre felt stifled by the smoke which seemed to hang over thehole city. Fires were visible on all sides. He did not then realizehe significance of the burning of Moscow, and looked at the firesith horror.
	He passed four days in the coach house near the Crimean bridge anduring that time learned, from the talk of the French soldiers, thatll those confined there were awaiting a decision which might come anyay from the marshal. What marshal this was, Pierre could not learnrom the soldiers. Evidently for them "the marshal" represented a veryigh and rather mysterious power.
	These first days, before the eighth of September when therisoners were had up for a second examination, were the hardest ofll for Pierre.BK12|CH10
	CHAPTER X
	On the eighth of September an officer- a very important oneudging by the respect the guards showed him- entered the coachouse where the prisoners were. This officer, probably someone onhe staff, was holding a paper in his hand, and called over all theussians there, naming Pierre as "the man who does not give his name."lancing indolently and indifferently at all the prisoners, he orderedhe officer in charge to have them decently dressed and tidied upefore taking them to the marshal. An hour later a squad of soldiersrrived and Pierre with thirteen others was led to the Virgin's Field.t was a fine day, sunny after rain, and the air was unusually pure.he smoke did not hang low as on the day when Pierre had been takenrom the guardhouse on the Zubovski rampart, but rose through the pureir in columns. No flames were seen, but columns of smoke rose onll sides, and all Moscow as far as Pierre could see was one vastharred ruin. On all sides there were waste spaces with only stovesnd chimney stacks still standing, and here and there the blackenedalls of some brick houses. Pierre gazed at the ruins and did notecognize districts he had known well. Here and there he could seehurches that had not been burned. The Kremlin, which was notestroyed, gleamed white in the distance with its towers and theelfry of Ivan the Great. The domes of the New Convent of the Virginlittered brightly and its bells were ringing particularly clearly.hese bells reminded Pierre that it was Sunday and the feast of theativity of the Virgin. But there seemed to be no one to celebratehis holiday: everywhere were blackened ruins, and the few Russians toe seen were tattered and frightened people who tried to hide whenhey saw the French.
	It was plain that the Russian nest was ruined and destroyed, butn place of the Russian order of life that had been destroyed,ierre unconsciously felt that a quite different, firm, French orderad been established over this ruined nest. He felt this in theooks of the soldiers who, marching in regular ranks briskly andaily, were escorting him and the other criminals; he felt it in theooks of an important French official in a carriage and pair driven by soldier, whom they met on the way. He felt it in the merry sounds ofegimental music he heard from the left side of the field, and feltnd realized it especially from the list of prisoners the Frenchfficer had read out when he came that morning. Pierre had beenaken by one set of soldiers and led first to one and then tonother place with dozens of other men, and it seemed that theyight have forgotten him, or confused him with the others. But no: thenswers he had given when questioned had come back to him in hisesignation as "the man who does not give his name," and under thatppellation, which to Pierre seemed terrible, they were now leadingim somewhere with unhesitating assurance on their faces that he andll the other prisoners were exactly the ones they wanted and thathey were being taken to the proper place. Pierre felt himself to ben insignificant chip fallen among the wheels of a machine whosection he did not understand but which was working well.
	He and the other prisoners were taken to the right side of theirgin's Field, to a large white house with an immense garden notar from the convent. This was Prince Shcherbitov's house, whereierre had often been in other days, and which, as he learned from thealk of the soldiers, was now occupied by the marshal, the Duke ofckmuhl (Davout).
	They were taken to the entrance and led into the house one by one.ierre was the sixth to enter. He was conducted through a glassallery, an anteroom, and a hall, which were familiar to him, into aong low study at the door of which stood an adjutant.
	Davout, spectacles on nose, sat bent over a table at the further endf the room. Pierre went close up to him, but Davout, evidentlyonsulting a paper that lay before him, did not look up. Withoutaising his eyes, he said in a low voice:
	"Who are you?"
	Pierre was silent because he was incapable of uttering a word. Toim Davout was not merely a French general, but a man notorious foris cruelty. Looking at his cold face, as he sat like a sternchoolmaster who was prepared to wait awhile for an answer, Pierreelt that every instant of delay might cost him his life; but he didot know what to say. He did not venture to repeat what he had said atis first examination, yet to disclose his rank and position wasangerous and embarrassing. So he was silent. But before he hadecided what to do, Davout raised his head, pushed his spectacles backn his forehead, screwed up his eyes, and looked intently at him.
	"I know that man," he said in a cold, measured tone, evidentlyalculated to frighten Pierre.
	The chill that had been running down Pierre's back now seized hisead as in a vise.
	"You cannot know me, General, I have never seen you..."
	"He is a Russian spy," Davout interrupted, addressing anothereneral who was present, but whom Pierre had not noticed.
	Davout turned away. With an unexpected reverberation in his voiceierre rapidly began:
	"No, monseigneur," he said, suddenly remembering that Davout was auke. "No, monseigneur, you cannot have known me. I am a militiafficer and have not quitted Moscow."
	"Your name?" asked Davout.
	"Bezukhov."
	"What proof have I that you are not lying?"
	"Monseigneur!" exclaimed Pierre, not in an offended but in aleading voice.
	Davout looked up and gazed intently at him. For some seconds theyooked at one another, and that look saved Pierre. Apart fromonditions of war and law, that look established human relationsetween the two men. At that moment an immense number of things passedimly through both their minds, and they realized that they wereoth children of humanity and were brothers.
	At the first glance, when Davout had only raised his head from theapers where human affairs and lives were indicated by numbers, Pierreas merely a circumstance, and Davout could have shot him withouturdening his conscience with an evil deed, but now he saw in him auman being. He reflected for a moment.
	"How can you show me that you are telling the truth?" said Davoutoldly.
	Pierre remembered Ramballe, and named him and his regiment and thetreet where the house was.
	"You are not what you say," returned Davout.
	In a trembling, faltering voice Pierre began adducing proofs ofhe truth of his statements.
	But at that moment an adjutant entered and reported something toavout.
	Davout brightened up at the news the adjutant brought, and beganuttoning up his uniform. It seemed that he had quite forgottenierre.
	When the adjutant reminded him of the prisoner, he jerked his headn Pierre's direction with a frown and ordered him to be led away. Buthere they were to take him Pierre did not know: back to the coachouse or to the place of execution his companions had pointed out toim as they crossed the Virgin's Field.
	He turned his head and saw that the adjutant was putting anotheruestion to Davout.
	"Yes, of course!" replied Davout, but what this "yes" meant,ierre did not know.
	Pierre could not afterwards remember how he went, whether it wasar, or in which direction. His faculties were quite numbed, he wastupefied, and noticing nothing around him went on moving his legss the others did till they all stopped and he stopped too. The onlyhought in his mind at that time was: who was it that had reallyentenced him to death? Not the men on the commission that had firstxamined him- not one of them wished to or, evidently, could have donet. It was not Davout, who had looked at him in so human a way. Innother moment Davout would have realized that he was doing wrong, butust then the adjutant had come in and interrupted him. Thedjutant, also, had evidently had no evil intent though he mightave refrained from coming in. Then who was executing him, killingim, depriving him of life- him, Pierre, with all his memories,spirations, hopes, and thoughts? Who was doing this? And Pierreelt that it was no one.
	It was a system- a concurrence of circumstances.
	A system of some sort was killing him- Pierre- depriving him ofife, of everything, annihilating him.BK12|CH11
	CHAPTER XI
	From Prince Shcherbatov's house the prisoners were led straight downhe Virgin's Field, to the left of the nunnery, as far as a kitchenarden in which a post had been set up. Beyond that post a fresh pitad been dug in the ground, and near the post and the pit a largerowd stood in a semicircle. The crowd consisted of a few Russians andany of Napoleon's soldiers who were not on duty- Germans, Italians,nd Frenchmen, in a variety of uniforms. To the right and left ofhe post stood rows of French troops in blue uniforms with redpaulets and high boots and shakos.
	The prisoners were placed in a certain order, according to theist (Pierre was sixth), and were led to the post. Several drumsuddenly began to beat on both sides of them, and at that sound Pierreelt as if part of his soul had been torn away. He lost the power ofhinking or understanding. He could only hear and see. And he had onlyne wish- that the frightful thing that had to happen should happenuickly. Pierre looked round at his fellow prisoners and scrutinizedhem.
	The two first were convicts with shaven heads. One was tall andhin, the other dark, shaggy, and sinewy, with a flat nose. Thehird was a domestic serf, about forty-five years old, with grizzledair and a plump, well-nourished body. The fourth was a peasant, aery handsome man with a broad, light-brown beard and black eyes.he fifth was a factory hand, a thin, sallow-faced lad of eighteenn a loose coat.
	Pierre heard the French consulting whether to shoot themeparately or two at a time. "In couples," replied the officer inommand in a calm voice. There was a stir in the ranks of the soldiersnd it was evident that they were all hurrying- not as men hurry to doomething they understand, but as people hurry to finish a necessaryut unpleasant and incomprehensible task.
	A French official wearing a scarf came up to the right of the row ofrisoners and read out the sentence in Russian and in French.
	Then two pairs of Frenchmen approached the criminals and at thefficer's command took the two convicts who stood first in the row.he convicts stopped when they reached the post and, while sacksere being brought, looked dumbly around as a wounded beast looks atn approaching huntsman. One crossed himself continually, the othercratched his back and made a movement of the lips resembling a smile.ith hurried hands the soldiers blindfolded them, drawing the sacksver their heads, and bound them to the post.
	Twelve sharpshooters with muskets stepped out of the ranks with airm regular tread and halted eight paces from the post. Pierre turnedway to avoid seeing what was going to happen. Suddenly a crackling,olling noise was heard which seemed to him louder than the mosterrific thunder, and he looked round. There was some smoke, and therenchmen were doing something near the pit, with pale faces andrembling hands. Two more prisoners were led up. In the same way andith similar looks, these two glanced vainly at the onlookers withnly a silent appeal for protection in their eyes, evidently unable tonderstand or believe what was going to happen to them. They could notelieve it because they alone knew what their life meant to them,nd so they neither understood nor believed that it could be takenrom them.
	Again Pierre did not wish to look and again turned away; but againhe sound as of a frightful explosion struck his ear, and at theame moment he saw smoke, blood, and the pale, scared faces of therenchmen who were again doing something by the post, theirrembling hands impeding one another. Pierre, breathing heavily,ooked around as if asking what it meant. The same question wasxpressed in all the looks that met his.
	On the faces of all the Russians and of the French soldiers andfficers without exception, he read the same dismay, horror, andonflict that were in his own heart. "But who, after all, is doinghis? They are all suffering as I am. Who then is it? Who?" flashedor an instant through his mind.
	"Sharpshooters of the 86th, forward!" shouted someone. The fifthrisoner, the one next to Pierre, was led away- alone. Pierre didot understand that he was saved, that he and the rest had beenrought there only to witness the execution. With ever-growing horror,nd no sense of joy or relief, he gazed at what was taking place.he fifth man was the factory lad in the loose cloak. The momenthey laid hands on him he sprang aside in terror and clutched atierre. (Pierre shuddered and shook himself free.) The lad wasnable to walk. They dragged him along, holding him up under the arms,nd he screamed. When they got him to the post he grew quiet, as if heuddenly understood something. Whether he understood that screamingas useless or whether he thought it incredible that men should killim, at any rate he took his stand at the post, waiting to belindfolded like the others, and like a wounded animal looked aroundim with glittering eyes.
	Pierre was no longer able to turn away and close his eyes. Hisuriosity and agitation, like that of the whole crowd, reached theighest pitch at this fifth murder. Like the others this fifth maneemed calm; he wrapped his loose cloak closer and rubbed one bareoot with the other.
	When they began to blindfold him he himself adjusted the knothich hurt the back of his head; then when they propped him againsthe bloodstained post, he leaned back and, not being comfortable inhat position, straightened himself, adjusted his feet, and leanedack again more comfortably. Pierre did not take his eyes from him andid not miss his slightest movement.
	Probably a word of command was given and was followed by the reportsf eight muskets; but try as he would Pierre could not afterwardsemember having heard the slightest sound of the shots. He only sawow the workman suddenly sank down on the cords that held him, howlood showed itself in two places, how the ropes slackened under theeight of the hanging body, and how the workman sat down, his headanging unnaturally and one leg bent under him. Pierre ran up to theost. No one hindered him. Pale, frightened people were doingomething around the workman. The lower jaw of an old Frenchman with ahick mustache trembled as he untied the ropes. The body collapsed.he soldiers dragged it awkwardly from the post and began pushing itnto the pit.
	They all plainly and certainly knew that they were criminals whoust hide the traces of their guilt as quickly as possible.
	Pierre glanced into the pit and saw that the factory lad was lyingith his knees close up to his head and one shoulder higher than thether. That shoulder rose and fell rhythmically and convulsively,ut spadefuls of earth were already being thrown over the wholeody. One of the soldiers, evidently suffering, shouted gruffly andngrily at Pierre to go back. But Pierre did not understand him andemained near the post, and no one drove him away.
	When the pit had been filled up a command was given. Pierre wasaken back to his place, and the rows of troops on both sides of theost made a half turn and went past it at a measured pace. Thewenty-four sharpshooters with discharged muskets, standing in theenter of the circle, ran back to their places as the companies passedy.
	Pierre gazed now with dazed eyes at these sharpshooters who ran inouples out of the circle. All but one rejoined their companies.his one, a young soldier, his face deadly pale, his shako pushedack, and his musket resting on the ground, still stood near the pitt the spot from which he had fired. He swayed like a drunken man,aking some steps forward and back to save himself from falling. Anld, noncommissioned officer ran out of the ranks and taking him byhe elbow dragged him to his company. The crowd of Russians andrenchmen began to disperse. They all went away silently and withrooping heads.
	"That will teach them to start fires," said one of the Frenchmen.
	Pierre glanced round at the speaker and saw that it was a soldierho was trying to find some relief after what had been done, but wasot able to do so. Without finishing what he had begun to say heade a hopeless movement with his arm and went away.BK12|CH12
	CHAPTER XII
	After the execution Pierre was separated from the rest of therisoners and placed alone in a small, ruined, and befouled church.
	Toward evening a noncommissioned officer entered with two soldiersnd told him that he had been pardoned and would now go to thearracks for the prisoners of war. Without understanding what was saido him, Pierre got up and went with the soldiers. They took him to thepper end of the field, where there were some sheds built of charredlanks, beams, and battens, and led him into one of them. In thearkness some twenty different men surrounded Pierre. He looked athem without understanding who they were, why they were there, or whathey wanted of him. He heard what they said, but did not understandhe meaning of the words and made no kind of deduction from orpplication of them. He replied to questions they put to him, butid not consider who was listening to his replies, nor how theyould understand them. He looked at their faces and figures, buthey all seemed to him equally meaningless.
	From the moment Pierre had witnessed those terrible murdersommitted by men who did not wish to commit them, it was as if theainspring of his life, on which everything depended and which madeverything appear alive, had suddenly been wrenched out and everythingad collapsed into a heap of meaningless rubbish. Though he did notcknowledge it to himself, his faith in the right ordering of theniverse, in humanity, in his own soul, and in God, had beenestroyed. He had experienced this before, but never so strongly asow. When similar doubts had assailed him before, they had been theesult of his own wrongdoing, and at the bottom of his heart he hadelt that relief from his despair and from those doubts was to beound within himself. But now he felt that the universe had crumbledefore his eyes and only meaningless ruins remained, and this not byny fault of his own. He felt that it was not in his power to regainaith in the meaning of life.
	Around him in the darkness men were standing and evidently somethingbout him interested them greatly. They were telling him something andsking him something. Then they led him away somewhere, and at last heound himself in a corner of the shed among men who were laughingnd talking on all sides.
	"Well, then, mates... that very prince who..." some voice at thether end of the shed was saying, with a strong emphasis on the wordho.
	Sitting silent and motionless on a heap of straw against the wall,ierre sometimes opened and sometimes closed his eyes. But as soons he closed them he saw before him the dreadful face of the factoryad- especially dreadful because of its simplicity- and the faces ofhe murderers, even more dreadful because of their disquiet. And hepened his eyes again and stared vacantly into the darkness aroundim.
	Beside him in a stooping position sat a small man of whoseresence he was first made aware by a strong smell of perspirationhich came from him every time he moved. This man was doingomething to his legs in the darkness, and though Pierre could not seeis face he felt that the man continually glanced at him. On growingsed to the darkness Pierre saw that the man was taking off his legands, and the way he did it aroused Pierre's interest.
	Having unwound the string that tied the band on one leg, hearefully coiled it up and immediately set to work on the other leg,lancing up at Pierre. While one hand hung up the first string thether was already unwinding the band on the second leg. In this way,aving carefully removed the leg bands by deft circular motions of hisrm following one another uninterruptedly, the man hung the legands up on some pegs fixed above his head. Then he took out anife, cut something, closed the knife, placed it under the head ofis bed, and, seating himself comfortably, clasped his arms roundis lifted knees and fixed his eyes on Pierre. The latter wasonscious of something pleasant, comforting, and well rounded in theseeft movements, in the man's well-ordered arrangements in hisorner, and even in his very smell, and he looked at the man withoutaking his eyes from him.
	"You've seen a lot of trouble, sir, eh?" the little man suddenlyaid.
	And there was so much kindliness and simplicity in his singsongoice that Pierre tried to reply, but his jaw trembled and he feltears rising to his eyes. The little fellow, giving Pierre no timeo betray his confusion, instantly continued in the same pleasantones:
	"Eh, lad, don't fret!" said he, in the tender singsong caressingoice old Russian peasant women employ. "Don't fret, friend- 'suffern hour, live for an age!' that's how it is, my dear fellow. Andere we live, thank heaven, without offense. Among these folk, too,here are good men as well as bad," said he, and still speaking, heurned on his knees with a supple movement, got up, coughed, andent off to another part of the shed.
	"Eh, you rascal!" Pierre heard the same kind voice saying at thether end of the shed. "So you've come, you rascal? She remembers...ow, now, that'll do!"
	And the soldier, pushing away a little dog that was jumping up atim, returned to his place and sat down. In his hands he had somethingrapped in a rag.
	"Here, eat a bit, sir," said he, resuming his former respectful tones he unwrapped and offered Pierre some baked potatoes. "We had soupor dinner and the potatoes are grand!"
	Pierre had not eaten all day and the smell of the potatoes seemedxtremely pleasant to him. He thanked the soldier and began to eat.
	"Well, are they all right?" said the soldier with a smile. "Youhould do like this."
	He took a potato, drew out his clasp knife, cut the potato intowo equal halves on the palm of his hand, sprinkled some salt on itrom the rag, and handed it to Pierre.
	"The potatoes are grand!" he said once more. "Eat some like that!"
	Pierre thought he had never eaten anything that tasted better.
	"Oh, I'm all right," said he, "but why did they shoot those poorellows? The last one was hardly twenty."
	"Tss, tt...!" said the little man. "Ah, what a sin... what a sin!"e added quickly, and as if his words were always waiting ready in hisouth and flew out involuntarily he went on: "How was it, sir, thatou stayed in Moscow?"
	"I didn't think they would come so soon. I stayed accidentally,"eplied Pierre.
	"And how did they arrest you, dear lad? At your house?"
	"No, I went to look at the fire, and they arrested me there, andried me as an incendiary."
	"Where there's law there's injustice," put in the little man.
	"And have you been here long?" Pierre asked as he munched the lastf the potato.
	"I? It was last Sunday they took me, out of a hospital in Moscow."
	"Why, are you a soldier then?"
	"Yes, we are soldiers of the Apsheron regiment. I was dying ofever. We weren't told anything. There were some twenty of us lyinghere. We had no idea, never guessed at all."
	"And do you feel sad here?" Pierre inquired.
	"How can one help it, lad? My name is Platon, and the surname isarataev," he added, evidently wishing to make it easier for Pierre toddress him. "They call me 'little falcon' in the regiment. How is oneo help feeling sad? Moscow- she's the mother of cities. How can oneee all this and not feel sad? But 'the maggot gnaws the cabbage,et dies first'; that's what the old folks used to tell us," hedded rapidly.
	"What? What did you say?" asked Pierre.
	"Who? I?" said Karataev. "I say things happen not as we plan buts God judges," he replied, thinking that he was repeating what he hadaid before, and immediately continued:
	"Well, and you, have you a family estate, sir? And a house? So youave abundance, then? And a housewife? And your old parents, arehey still living?" he asked.
	And though it was too dark for Pierre to see, he felt that auppressed smile of kindliness puckered the soldier's lips as he puthese questions. He seemed grieved that Pierre had no parents,specially that he had no mother.
	"A wife for counsel, a mother-in-law for welcome, but there's nones dear as one's own mother!" said he. "Well, and have you littlenes?" he went on asking.
	Again Pierre's negative answer seemed to distress him, and heastened to add:
	"Never mind! You're young folks yet, and please God may still haveome. The great thing is to live in harmony...."
	"But it's all the same now," Pierre could not help saying.
	"Ah, my dear fellow!" rejoined Karataev, "never decline a prisonr a beggar's sack!"
	He seated himself more comfortably and coughed, evidentlyreparing to tell a long story.
	"Well, my dear fellow, I was still living at home," he began. "Wead a well-to-do homestead, plenty of land, we peasants lived well andur house was one to thank God for. When Father and we went out mowinghere were seven of us. We lived well. We were real peasants. It soappened..."
	And Platon Karataev told a long story of how he had gone intoomeone's copse to take wood, how he had been caught by the keeper,ad been tried, flogged, and sent to serve as a soldier.
	"Well, lad," and a smile changed the tone of his voice "we thoughtt was a misfortune but it turned out a blessing! If it had not beenor my sin, my brother would have had to go as a soldier. But he, myounger brother, had five little ones, while I, you see, only left aife behind. We had a little girl, but God took her before I went as aoldier. I come home on leave and I'll tell you how it was, I look andee that they are living better than before. The yard full ofattle, the women at home, two brothers away earning wages, and onlyichael the youngest, at home. Father, he says, 'All my children arehe same to me: it hurts the same whichever finger gets bitten. But iflaton hadn't been shaved for a soldier, Michael would have had too.' called us all to him and, will you believe it, placed us in frontf the icons. 'Michael,' he says, 'come here and bow down to his feet;nd you, young woman, you bow down too; and you, grandchildren, alsoow down before him! Do you understand?' he says. That's how it is,ear fellow. Fate looks for a head. But we are always judging, 'that'sot well- that's not right!' Our luck is like water in a dragnet:ou pull at it and it bulges, but when you've drawn it out it's empty!hat's how it is."
	And Platon shifted his seat on the straw.
	After a short silence he rose.
	"Well, I think you must be sleepy," said he, and began rapidlyrossing himself and repeating:
	"Lord Jesus Christ, holy Saint Nicholas, Frola and Lavra! Lord Jesushrist, holy Saint Nicholas, Frola and Lavra! Lord Jesus Christ,ave mercy on us and save us!" he concluded, then bowed to the ground,ot up, sighed, and sat down again on his heap of straw. "That's theay. Lay me down like a stone, O God, and raise me up like a loaf," heuttered as he lay down, pulling his coat over him.
	"What prayer was that you were saying?" asked Pierre.
	"Eh?" murmured Platon, who had almost fallen asleep. "What was Iaying? I was praying. Don't you pray?"
	"Yes, I do," said Pierre. "But what was that you said: Frola andavra?"
	"Well, of course," replied Platon quickly, "the horses' saints.ne must pity the animals too. Eh, the rascal! Now you've curled upnd got warm, you daughter of a bitch!" said Karataev, touching theog that lay at his feet, and again turning over he fell asleepmmediately.
	Sounds of crying and screaming came from somewhere in the distanceutside, and flames were visible through the cracks of the shed, butnside it was quiet and dark. For a long time Pierre did not sleep,ut lay with eyes open in the darkness, listening to the regularnoring of Platon who lay beside him, and he felt that the worldhat had been shattered was once more stirring in his soul with aew beauty and on new and unshakable foundations.BK12|CH13
	CHAPTER XIII
	Twenty-three soldiers, three officers, and two officials wereonfined in the shed in which Pierre had been placed and where heemained for four weeks.
	When Pierre remembered them afterwards they all seemed misty figureso him except Platon Karataev, who always remained in his mind aost vivid and precious memory and the personification of everythingussian, kindly, and round. When Pierre saw his neighbor nextorning at dawn the first impression of him, as of something round,as fully confirmed: Platon's whole figure- in a French overcoatirdled with a cord, a soldier's cap, and bast shoes- was round. Hisead was quite round, his back, chest, shoulders, and even his arms,hich he held as if ever ready to embrace something, were rounded, hisleasant smile and his large, gentle brown eyes were also round.
	Platon Karataev must have been fifty, judging by his stories ofampaigns he had been in, told as by an old soldier. He did notimself know his age and was quite unable to determine it. But hisrilliantly white, strong teeth which showed in two unbrokenemicircles when he laughed- as he often did- were all sound and good,here was not a gray hair in his beard or on his head, and his wholeody gave an impression of suppleness and especially of firmness andndurance.
	His face, despite its fine, rounded wrinkles, had an expression ofnnocence and youth, his voice was pleasant and musical. But the chiefeculiarity of his speech was its directness and appositeness. Itas evident that he never considered what he had said or was goingo say, and consequently the rapidity and justice of his intonationad an irresistible persuasiveness.
	His physical strength and agility during the first days of hismprisonment were such that he seemed not to know what fatigue andickness meant. Every night before lying down, he said: "Lord, laye down as a stone and raise me up as a loaf!" and every morning onetting up, he said: "I lay down and curled up, I get up and shakeyself." And indeed he only had to lie down, to fall asleep like atone, and he only had to shake himself, to be ready without aoment's delay for some work, just as children are ready to playirectly they awake. He could do everything, not very well but notadly. He baked, cooked, sewed, planed, and mended boots. He waslways busy, and only at night allowed himself conversation- ofhich he was fond- and songs. He did not sing like a trained singerho knows he is listened to, but like the birds, evidently giving vento the sounds in the same way that one stretches oneself or walksbout to get rid of stiffness, and the sounds were alwaysigh-pitched, mournful, delicate, and almost feminine, and his face atuch times was very serious.
	Having been taken prisoner and allowed his beard to grow, heeemed to have thrown off all that had been forced upon him-verything military and alien to himself- and had returned to hisormer peasant habits.
	"A soldier on leave- a shirt outside breeches," he would say.
	He did not like talking about his life as a soldier, though he didot complain, and often mentioned that he had not been flogged onceuring the whole of his army service. When he related anything itas generally some old and evidently precious memory of hisChristian" life, as he called his peasant existence. The proverbs, ofhich his talk was full, were for the most part not the coarse andndecent saws soldiers employ, but those folk sayings which takenithout a context seem so insignificant, but when used appositelyuddenly acquire a significance of profound wisdom.
	He would often say the exact opposite of what he had said on arevious occasion, yet both would be right. He liked to talk and healked well, adorning his speech with terms of endearment and witholk sayings which Pierre thought he invented himself, but the chiefharm of his talk lay in the fact that the commonest events- sometimesust such as Pierre had witnessed without taking notice of them-ssumed in Karataev's a character of solemn fitness. He liked toear the folk tales one of the soldiers used to tell of an eveningthey were always the same), but most of all he liked to heartories of real life. He would smile joyfully when listening to suchtories, now and then putting in a word or asking a question to makehe moral beauty of what he was told clear to himself. Karataev had nottachments, friendships, or love, as Pierre understood them, butoved and lived affectionately with everything life brought him inontact with, particularly with man- not any particular man, but thoseith whom he happened to be. He loved his dog, his comrades, therench, and Pierre who was his neighbor, but Pierre felt that in spitef Karataev's affectionate tenderness for him (by which henconsciously gave Pierre's spiritual life its due) he would notave grieved for a moment at parting from him. And Pierre began toeel in the same way toward Karataev.
	To all the other prisoners Platon Karataev seemed a most ordinaryoldier. They called him "little falcon" or "Platosha," chaffed himood-naturedly, and sent him on errands. But to Pierre he alwaysemained what he had seemed that first night: an unfathomable,ounded, eternal personification of the spirit of simplicity andruth.
	Platon Karataev knew nothing by heart except his prayers. When heegan to speak he seemed not to know how he would conclude.
	Sometimes Pierre, struck by the meaning of his words, would askim to repeat them, but Platon could never recall what he had said aoment before, just as he never could repeat to Pierre the words ofis favorite song: native and birch tree and my heart is sick occurredn it, but when spoken and not sung, no meaning could be got out oft. He did not, and could not, understand the meaning of words apartrom their context. Every word and action of his was the manifestationf an activity unknown to him, which was his life. But his life, as heegarded it, had no meaning as a separate thing. It had meaning onlys part of a whole of which he was always conscious. His words andctions flowed from him as evenly, inevitably, and spontaneously asragrance exhales from a flower. He could not understand the valuer significance of any word or deed taken separately.BK12|CH14
	CHAPTER XIV
	When Princess Mary heard from Nicholas that her brother was with theostovs at Yaroslavl she at once prepared to go there, in spite of herunt's efforts to dissuade her- and not merely to go herself but toake her nephew with her. Whether it were difficult or easy,ossible or impossible, she did not ask and did not want to know: itas her duty not only herself to be near her brother who was perhapsying, but to do everything possible to take his son to him, and sohe prepared to set off. That she had not heard from Prince Andrewimself, Princess Mary attributed to his being too weak to write or tois considering the long journey too hard and too dangerous for hernd his son.
	In a few days Princess Mary was ready to start. Her equipages werehe huge family coach in which she had traveled to Voronezh, aemiopen trap, and a baggage cart. With her traveled Mademoiselleourienne, little Nicholas and his tutor, her old nurse, threeaids, Tikhon, and a young footman and courier her aunt had sent toccompany her.
	The usual route through Moscow could not be thought of, and theoundabout way Princess Mary was obliged to take through Lipetsk,yazan, Vladimir, and Shuya was very long and, as post horses were notverywhere obtainable, very difficult, and near Ryazan where therench were said to have shown themselves was even dangerous.
	During this difficult journey Mademoiselle Bourienne, Dessalles, andrincess Mary's servants were astonished at her energy and firmness ofpirit. She went to bed later and rose earlier than any of them, ando difficulties daunted her. Thanks to her activity and energy,hich infected her fellow travelers, they approached Yaroslavl byhe end of the second week.
	The last days of her stay in Voronezh had been the happiest of herife. Her love for Rostov no longer tormented or agitated her. Itilled her whole soul, had become an integral part of herself, and sheo longer struggled against it. Latterly she had become convinced thathe loved and was beloved, though she never said this definitely toerself in words. She had become convinced of it at her last interviewith Nicholas, when he had come to tell her that her brother wasith the Rostovs. Not by a single word had Nicholas alluded to theact that Prince Andrew's relations with Natasha might, if heecovered, be renewed, but Princess Mary saw by his face that henew and thought of this.
	Yet in spite of that, his relation to her- considerate, delicate,nd loving- not only remained unchanged, but it sometimes seemed torincess Mary that he was even glad that the family connection betweenhem allowed him to express his friendship more freely. She knewhat she loved for the first and only time in her life and felt thathe was beloved, and was happy in regard to it.
	But this happiness on one side of her spiritual nature did notrevent her feeling grief for her brother with full force; on theontrary, that spiritual tranquility on the one side made it theore possible for her to give full play to her feeling for herrother. That feeling was so strong at the moment of leavingoronezh that those who saw her off, as they looked at her careworn,espairing face, felt sure she would fall ill on the journey. Buthe very difficulties and preoccupations of the journey, which sheook so actively in hand, saved her for a while from her grief andave her strength.
	As always happens when traveling, Princess Mary thought only ofhe journey itself, forgetting its object. But as she approachedaroslavl the thought of what might await her there- not after manyays, but that very evening- again presented itself to her and hergitation increased to its utmost limit.
	The courier who had been sent on in advance to find out where theostovs were staying in Yaroslavl, and in what condition Prince Andrewas, when he met the big coach just entering the town gates wasppalled by the terrible pallor of the princess' face that lookedut at him from the window.
	"I have found out everything, your excellency: the Rostovs aretaying at the merchant Bronnikov's house, in the Square not farrom here, right above the Volga," said the courier.
	Princess Mary looked at him with frightened inquiry, notnderstanding why he did not reply to what she chiefly wanted to know:ow was her brother? Mademoiselle Bourienne put that question for her.
	"How is the prince?" she asked.
	"His excellency is staying in the same house with them."
	"Then he is alive," thought Princess Mary, and asked in a low voice:How is he?"
	"The servants say he is still the same."
	What "still the same" might mean Princess Mary did not ask, but withn unnoticed glance at little seven-year-old Nicholas, who was sittingn front of her looking with pleasure at the town, she bowed heread and did not raise it again till the heavy coach, rumbling,haking and swaying, came to a stop. The carriage steps clattered ashey were let down.
	The carriage door was opened. On the left there was water- a greativer- and on the right a porch. There were people at the entrance:ervants, and a rosy girl with a large plait of black hair, smiling ast seemed to Princess Mary in an unpleasantly affected way. (Thisas Sonya.) Princess Mary ran up the steps. "This way, this way!" saidhe girl, with the same artificial smile, and the princess founderself in the hall facing an elderly woman of Oriental type, who cameapidly to meet her with a look of emotion. This was the countess. Shembraced Princess Mary and kissed her.
	"Mon enfant!" she muttered, "je vous aime et vous connais depuisongtemps."*
	*"My child! I love you and have known you a long time."Despite her excitement, Princess Mary realized that this was theountess and that it was necessary to say something to her. Hardlynowing how she did it, she contrived to utter a few polite phrases inrench in the same tone as those that had been addressed to her, andsked: "How is he?"
	"The doctor says that he is not in danger," said the countess, buts she spoke she raised her eyes with a sigh, and her gesture conveyed contradiction of her words.
	"Where is he? Can I see him- can I?" asked the princess.
	"One moment, Princess, one moment, my dear! Is this his son?" saidhe countess, turning to little Nicholas who was coming in withessalles. "There will be room for everybody, this is a big house. Oh,hat a lovely boy!"
	The countess took Princess Mary into the drawing room, where Sonyaas talking to Mademoiselle Bourienne. The countess caressed theoy, and the old count came in and welcomed the princess. He hadhanged very much since Princess Mary had last seen him. Then he hadeen a brisk, cheerful, self-assured old man; now he seemed a pitiful,ewildered person. While talking to Princess Mary he continuallyooked round as if asking everyone whether he was doing the righthing. After the destruction of Moscow and of his property, thrown outf his accustomed groove he seemed to have lost the sense of his ownignificance and to feel that there was no longer a place for him inife.
	In spite of her one desire to see her brother as soon as possible,nd her vexation that at the moment when all she wanted was to see himhey should be trying to entertain her and pretending to admire herephew, the princess noticed all that was going on around her and felthe necessity of submitting, for a time, to this new order of thingshich she had entered. She knew it to be necessary, and though itas hard for her she was not vexed with these people.
	"This is my niece," said the count, introducing Sonya- "You don'tnow her, Princess?"
	Princess Mary turned to Sonya and, trying to stifle the hostileeeling that arose in her toward the girl, she kissed her. But sheelt oppressed by the fact that the mood of everyone around her was soar from what was in her own heart.
	"Where is he?" she asked again, addressing them all.
	"He is downstairs. Natasha is with him," answered Sonya, flushing.We have sent to ask. I think you must be tired, Princess."
	Tears of vexation showed themselves in Princess Mary's eyes. Sheurned away and was about to ask the countess again how to go toim, when light, impetuous, and seemingly buoyant steps were heardt the door. The princess looked round and saw Natasha coming in,lmost running- that Natasha whom she had liked so little at theireeting in Moscow long since.
	But hardly had the princess looked at Natasha's face before sheealized that here was a real comrade in her grief, and consequently ariend. She ran to meet her, embraced her, and began to cry on herhoulder.
	As soon as Natasha, sitting at the head of Prince Andrew's bed,eard of Princess Mary's arrival, she softly left his room andastened to her with those swift steps that had sounded buoyant torincess Mary.
	There was only one expression on her agitated face when she ran intohe drawing room- that of love- boundless love for him, for her, andor all that was near to the man she loved; and of pity, suffering forthers, and passionate desire to give herself entirely to helpinghem. It was plain that at that moment there was in Natasha's heart nohought of herself or of her own relations with Prince Andrew.
	Princess Mary, with her acute sensibility, understood all this athe first glance at Natasha's face, and wept on her shoulder withorrowful pleasure.
	"Come, come to him, Mary," said Natasha, leading her into thether room.
	Princess Mary raised her head, dried her eyes, and turned toatasha. She felt that from her she would be able to understand andearn everything.
	"How..." she began her question but stopped short.
	She felt that it was impossible to ask, or to answer, in words.atasha's face eyes would eyes would have to tell her all more clearlynd profoundly.
	Natasha was gazing at her, but seemed afraid and in doubt whether toay all she knew or not; she seemed to feel that before those luminousyes which penetrated into the very depths of her heart, it wasmpossible not to tell the whole truth which she saw. And suddenly,atasha's lips twitched, ugly wrinkles gathered round her mouth, andovering her face with her hands she burst into sobs.
	Princess Mary understood.
	But she still hoped, and asked, in words she herself did not trust:
	"But how is his wound? What is his general condition?"
	"You, you... will see," was all Natasha could say.
	They sat a little while downstairs near his room till they hadeft off crying and were able to go to him with calm faces.
	"How has his whole illness gone? Is it long since he grew worse?hen did this happen?" Princess Mary inquired.
	Natasha told her that at first there had been danger from hiseverish condition and the pain he suffered, but at Troitsa that hadassed and the doctor had only been afraid of gangrene. That dangerad also passed. When they reached Yaroslavl the wound had begun toester (Natasha knew all about such things as festering) and theoctor had said that the festering might take a normal course. Thenever set in, but the doctor had said the fever was not very serious.
	"But two days ago this suddenly happened," said Natasha,truggling with her sobs. "I don't know why, but you will see whate is like."
	"Is he weaker? Thinner?" asked the princess.
	"No, it's not that, but worse. You will see. O, Mary, he is tooood, he cannot, cannot live, because..."BK12|CH15
	CHAPTER XV
	When Natasha opened Prince Andrew's door with a familiar movementnd let Princess Mary pass into the room before her, the princess felthe sobs in her throat. Hard as she had tried to prepare herself,nd now tried to remain tranquil, she knew that she would be unable toook at him without tears.
	The princess understood what Natasha had meant by the words: "twoays ago this suddenly happened." She understood those words to meanhat he had suddenly softened and that this softening and gentlenessere signs of approaching death. As she stepped to the door shelready saw in imagination Andrew's face as she remembered it inhildhood, a gentle, mild, sympathetic face which he had rarely shown,nd which therefore affected her very strongly. She was sure heould speak soft, tender words to her such as her father had utteredefore his death, and that she would not be able to bear it andould burst into sobs in his presence. Yet sooner or later it had toe, and she went in. The sobs rose higher and higher in her throats she more and more clearly distinguished his form and herhortsighted eyes tried to make out his features, and then she saw hisace and met his gaze.
	He was lying in a squirrel-fur dressing gown on a divan,urrounded by pillows. He was thin and pale. In one thin,ranslucently white hand he held a handkerchief, while with thether he stroked the delicate mustache he had grown, moving hisingers slowly. His eyes gazed at them as they entered.
	On seeing his face and meeting his eyes Princess Mary's paceuddenly slackened, she felt her tears dry up and her sobs ceased. Sheuddenly felt guilty and grew timid on catching the expression ofis face and eyes.
	"But in what am I to blame?" she asked herself. And his cold,tern look replied: "Because you are alive and thinking of the living,hile I..."
	In the deep the deep gaze that seemed to look not outwards butnwards there was an almost hostile expression as he slowly regardedis sister and Natasha.
	He kissed his sister, holding her hand in his as was their wont.
	"How are you, Mary? How did you manage to get here?" said he in aoice as calm and aloof as his look.
	Had he screamed in agony, that scream would not have struck suchorror into Princess Mary's heart as the tone of his voice.
	"And have you brought little Nicholas?" he asked in the same slow,uiet manner and with an obvious effort to remember.
	"How are you now?" said Princess Mary, herself surprised at what sheas saying.
	"That, my dear, you must ask the doctor," he replied, and againaking an evident effort to be affectionate, he said with his lipsnly (his words clearly did not correspond to his thoughts):
	"Merci, chere amie, d'etre venue."*
	*"Thank you for coming, my dear."
	Princess Mary pressed his hand. The pressure made him wince justerceptibly. He was silent, and she did not know what to say. Sheow understood what had happened to him two days before. In his words,is tone, and especially in that calm, almost antagonistic lookould be felt an estrangement from everything belonging to this world,errible in one who is alive. Evidently only with an effort did henderstand anything living; but it was obvious that he failed tonderstand, not because he lacked the power to do so but because henderstood something else- something the living did not and couldot understand- and which wholly occupied his mind.
	"There, you see how strangely fate has brought us together," saide, breaking the silence and pointing to Natasha. "She looks aftere all the time."
	Princess Mary heard him and did not understand how he could say such thing. He, the sensitive, tender Prince Andrew, how could he sayhat, before her whom he loved and who loved him? Had he expected toive he could not have said those words in that offensively cold tone.f he had not known that he was dying, how could he have failed toity her and how could he speak like that in her presence? The onlyxplanation was that he was indifferent, because something else,uch more important, had been revealed to him.
	The conversation was cold and disconnected and continually brokeff.
	"Mary came by way of Ryazan," said Natasha.
	Prince Andrew did not notice that she called his sister Mary, andnly after calling her so in his presence did Natasha notice iterself.
	"Really?" he asked.
	"They told her that all Moscow has been burned down, and that..."
	Natasha stopped. It was impossible to talk. It was plain that he wasaking an effort to listen, but could not do so.
	"Yes, they say it's burned," he said. "It's a great pity," and heazed straight before him, absently stroking his mustache with hisingers.
	"And so you have met Count Nicholas, Mary?" Prince Andrew suddenlyaid, evidently wishing to speak pleasantly to them. "He wrote herehat he took a great liking to you," he went on simply and calmly,vidently unable to understand all the complex significance hisords had for living people. "If you liked him too, it would be a goodhing for you to get married," he added rather more quickly, as ifleased at having found words he had long been seeking.
	Princess Mary heard his words but they had no meaning for her,xcept as a proof of how far away he now was from everything living.
	"Why talk of me?" she said quietly and glanced at Natasha.
	Natasha, who felt her glance, did not look at her. All three weregain silent.
	"Andrew, would you like..." Princess Mary suddenly said in arembling voice, "would you like to see little Nicholas? He islways talking about you!"
	Prince Andrew smiled just perceptibly and for the first time, butrincess Mary, who knew his face so well, saw with horror that heid not smile with pleasure or affection for his son, but withuiet, gentle irony because he thought she was trying what sheelieved to be the last means of arousing him.
	"Yes, I shall be very glad to see him. Is he quite well?"
	When little Nicholas was brought into Prince Andrew's room he lookedt his father with frightened eyes, but did not cry, because no onelse was crying. Prince Andrew kissed him and evidently did not knowhat to say to him.
	When Nicholas had been led away, Princess Mary again went up toer brother, kissed him, and unable to restrain her tears any longeregan to cry.
	He looked at her attentively.
	"Is it about Nicholas?" he asked.
	Princess Mary nodded her head, weeping.
	"Mary, you know the Gosp..." but he broke off.
	"What did you say?"
	"Nothing. You mustn't cry here," he said, looking at her with theame cold expression.
	When Princess Mary began to cry, he understood that she was cryingt the thought that little Nicholas would be left without a father.ith a great effort he tried to return to life and to see thingsrom their point of view.
	"Yes, to them it must seem sad!" he thought. "But how simple it is.
	"The fowls of the air sow not, neither do they reap, yet your Fathereedeth them," he said to himself and wished to say to Princessary; "but no, they will take it their own way, they won't understand!hey can't understand that all those feelings they prize so- all oureelings, all those ideas that seem so important to us, arennecessary. We cannot understand one another," and he remainedilent.
	Prince Andrew's little son was seven. He could scarcely read, andnew nothing. After that day he lived through many things, gainingnowledge, observation, and experience, but had he possessed all theaculties he afterwards acquired, he could not have had a better orore profound understanding of the meaning of the scene he haditnessed between his father, Mary, and Natasha, than he had then.e understood it completely, and, leaving the room without crying,ent silently up to Natasha who had come out with him and looked shylyt her with his beautiful, thoughtful eyes, then his uplifted, rosypper lip trembled and leaning his head against her he began to cry.
	After that he avoided Dessalles and the countess who caressed himnd either sat alone or came timidly to Princess Mary, or to Natashaf whom he seemed even fonder than of his aunt, and clung to themuietly and shyly.
	When Princess Mary had left Prince Andrew she fully understoodhat Natasha's face had told her. She did not speak any more toatasha of hopes of saving his life. She took turns with her besideis sofa, and did not cry any more, but prayed continually, turning inoul to that Eternal and Unfathomable, whose presence above theying man was now so evident.BK12|CH16
	CHAPTER XVI
	Not only did Prince Andrew know he would die, but he felt that heas dying and was already half dead. He was conscious of anloofness from everything earthly and a strange and joyous lightnessf existence. Without haste or agitation he awaited what was coming.hat inexorable, eternal, distant, and unknown the presence of whiche had felt continually all his life- was now near to him and, byhe strange lightness he experienced, almost comprehensible andalpable...
	Formerly he had feared the end. He had twice experienced thaterribly tormenting fear of death- the end- but now he no longernderstood that fear.
	 He had felt it for the first time when the shell spun like a topefore him, and he looked at the fallow field, the bushes, and theky, and knew that he was face to face with death. When he came toimself after being wounded and the flower of eternal, unfettered lovead instantly unfolded itself in his soul as if freed from the bondagef life that had restrained it, he no longer feared death and ceasedo think about it.
	During the hours of solitude, suffering, and partial delirium hepent after he was wounded, the more deeply he penetrated into the newrinciple of eternal love revealed to him, the more he unconsciouslyetached himself from earthly life. To love everything and everybodynd always to sacrifice oneself for love meant not to love anyone, noto live this earthly life. And the more imbued he became with thatrinciple of love, the more he renounced life and the moreompletely he destroyed that dreadful barrier which- in the absence ofuch love- stands between life and death. When during those first dayse remembered that he would have to die, he said to himself: "Well,hat of it? So much the better!"
	But after the night in Mytishchi when, half delirious, he had seener for whom he longed appear before him and, having pressed herand to his lips, had shed gentle, happy tears, love for aarticular woman again crept unobserved into his heart and once moreound him to life. And joyful and agitating thoughts began to occupyis mind. Recalling the moment at the ambulance station when he hadeen Kuragin, he could not now regain the feeling he then had, but wasormented by the question whether Kuragin was alive. And he daredot inquire.
	His illness pursued its normal physical course, but what Natashaeferred to when she said: "This suddenly happened," had occurredwo days before Princess Mary arrived. It was the last spiritualtruggle between life and death, in which death gained the victory. Itas the unexpected realization of the fact that he still valued lifes presented to him in the form of his love for Natasha, and a last,hough ultimately vanquished, attack of terror before the unknown.
	It was evening. As usual after dinner he was slightly feverish,nd his thoughts were preternaturally clear. Sonya was sitting byhe table. He began to doze. Suddenly a feeling of happiness seizedim.
	"Ah, she has come!" thought he.
	And so it was: in Sonya's place sat Natasha who had just come inoiselessly.
	Since she had begun looking after him, he had always experiencedhis physical consciousness of her nearness. She was sitting in anrmchair placed sideways, screening the light of the candle fromim, and was knitting a stocking. She had learned to knit stockingsince Prince Andrew had casually mentioned that no one nursed the sicko well as old nurses who knit stockings, and that there isomething soothing in the knitting of stockings. The needles clickedightly in her slender, rapidly moving hands, and he could clearly seehe thoughtful profile of her drooping face. She moved, and the ballolled off her knees. She started, glanced round at him, and screeninghe candle with her hand stooped carefully with a supple and exactovement, picked up the ball, and regained her former position.
	He looked at her without moving and saw that she wanted to draw aeep breath after stooping, but refrained from doing so and breathedautiously.
	At the Troitsa monastery they had spoken of the past, and he hadold her that if he lived he would always thank God for his woundhich had brought them together again, but after that they never spokef the future.
	"Can it or can it not be?" he now thought as he looked at her andistened to the light click of the steel needles. "Can fate haverought me to her so strangely only for me to die?... Is it possiblehat the truth of life has been revealed to me only to show me that have spent my life in falsity? I love her more than anything inhe world! But what am I to do if I love her?" he thought, and henvoluntarily groaned, from a habit acquired during his sufferings.
	On hearing that sound Natasha put down the stocking, leaned nearero him, and suddenly, noticing his shining eyes, stepped lightly up toim and bent over him.
	"You are not asleep?"
	"No, I have been looking at you a long time. I felt you come in.o one else gives me that sense of soft tranquillity that you do...hat light. I want to weep for joy."
	Natasha drew closer to him. Her face shone with rapturous joy.
	"Natasha, I love you too much! More than anything in the world."
	"And I!"- She turned away for an instant. "Why too much?" she asked.
	"Why too much?... Well, what do you, what do you feel in youroul, your whole soul- shall I live? What do you think?"
	"I am sure of it, sure!" Natasha almost shouted, taking hold of bothis hands with a passionate movement.
	He remained silent awhile.
	"How good it would be!" and taking her hand he kissed it.
	Natasha felt happy and agitated, but at once remembered that thisould not do and that he had to be quiet.
	"But you have not slept," she said, repressing her joy. "Try toleep... please!"
	He pressed her hand and released it, and she went back to the candlend sat down again in her former position. Twice she turned and lookedt him, and her eyes met his beaming at her. She set herself a task oner stocking and resolved not to turn round till it was finished.
	Soon he really shut his eyes and fell asleep. He did not sleepong and suddenly awoke with a start and in a cold perspiration.
	As he fell asleep he had still been thinking of the subject that nowlways occupied his mind- about life and death, and chiefly abouteath. He felt himself nearer to it.
	"Love? What is love?" he thought.
	"Love hinders death. Love is life. All, everything that Inderstand, I understand only because I love. Everything is,verything exists, only because I love. Everything is united by itlone. Love is God, and to die means that I, a particle of love, shalleturn to the general and eternal source." These thoughts seemed toim comforting. But they were only thoughts. Something was lackingn them, they were not clear, they were too one-sidedly personal andrain-spun. And there was the former agitation and obscurity. Heell asleep.
	He dreamed that he was lying in the room he really was in, buthat he was quite well and unwounded. Many various, indifferent, andnsignificant people appeared before him. He talked to them andiscussed something trivial. They were preparing to go away somewhere.rince Andrew dimly realized that all this was trivial and that he hadore important cares, but he continued to speak, surprising them bympty witticisms. Gradually, unnoticed, all these persons began toisappear and a single question, that of the closed door, supersededll else. He rose and went to the door to bolt and lock it. Everythingepended on whether he was, or was not, in time to lock it. He went,nd tried to hurry, but his legs refused to move and he knew heould not be in time to lock the door though he painfully strained allis powers. He was seized by an agonizing fear. And that fear washe fear of death. It stood behind the door. But just when he waslumsily creeping toward the door, that dreadful something on thether side was already pressing against it and forcing its way in.omething not human- death- was breaking in through that door, and hado be kept out. He seized the door, making a final effort to hold itack- to lock it was no longer possible- but his efforts were weak andlumsy and the door, pushed from behind by that terror, opened andlosed again.
	Once again it pushed from outside. His last superhuman effortsere vain and both halves of the door noiselessly opened. Itntered, and it was death, and Prince Andrew died.
	But at the instant he died, Prince Andrew remembered that he wassleep, and at the very instant he died, having made an effort, hewoke.
	"Yes, it was death! I died- and woke up. Yes, death is anwakening!" And all at once it grew light in his soul and the veilhat had till then concealed the unknown was lifted from his spiritualision. He felt as if powers till then confined within him had beeniberated, and that strange lightness did not again leave him.
	When, waking in a cold perspiration, he moved on the divan,atasha went up and asked him what was the matter. He did not answernd looked at her strangely, not understanding.
	That was what had happened to him two days before Princess Mary'srrival. From that day, as the doctor expressed it, the wastingever assumed a malignant character, but what the doctor said didot interest Natasha, she saw the terrible moral symptoms which to herere more convincing.
	From that day an awakening from life came to Prince Andrewogether with his awakening from sleep. And compared to the durationf life it did not seem to him slower than an awakening from sleepompared to the duration of a dream.
	There was nothing terrible or violent in this comparatively slowwakening.
	His last days and hours passed in an ordinary and simple way. Bothrincess Mary and Natasha, who did not leave him, felt this. Theyid not weep or shudder and during these last days they themselveselt that they were not attending on him (he was no longer there, head left them) but on what reminded them most closely of him- hisody. Both felt this so strongly that the outward and terrible side ofeath did not affect them and they did not feel it necessary to fomentheir grief. Neither in his presence nor out of it did they weep,or did they ever talk to one another about him. They felt that theyould not express in words what they understood.
	They both saw that he was sinking slowly and quietly, deeper andeeper, away from them, and they both knew that this had to be sond that it was right.
	He confessed, and received communion: everyone came to take leave ofim. When they brought his son to him, he pressed his lips to theoy's and turned away, not because he felt it hard and sad (Princessary and Natasha understood that) but simply because he thought it wasll that was required of him, but when they told him to bless the boy,e did what was demanded and looked round as if asking whether thereas anything else he should do.
	When the last convulsions of the body, which the spirit was leaving,ccurred, Princess Mary and Natasha were present.
	"Is it over?" said Princess Mary when his body had for a few minutesain motionless, growing cold before them. Natasha went up, lookedt the dead eyes, and hastened to close them. She closed them butid not kiss them, but clung to that which reminded her most nearly ofim- his body.
	"Where has he gone? Where is he now?..."
	When the body, washed and dressed, lay in the coffin on a table,veryone came to take leave of him and they all wept.
	Little Nicholas cried because his heart was rent by painfulerplexity. The countess and Sonya cried from pity for Natasha andecause he was no more. The old count cried because he felt thatefore long, he, too, must take the same terrible step.
	Natasha and Princess Mary also wept now, but not because of theirwn personal grief; they wept with a reverent and softening emotionhich had taken possession of their souls at the consciousness ofhe simple and solemn mystery of death that had been accomplished inheir presence.BK13	                            BOOK THIRTEEN: 1812BK13|CH1
	CHAPTER I
	Man's mind cannot grasp the causes of events in theirompleteness, but the desire to find those causes is implanted inan's soul. And without considering the multiplicity and complexity ofhe conditions any one of which taken separately may seem to be theause, he snatches at the first approximation to a cause that seems toim intelligible and says: "This is the cause!" In historical eventswhere the actions of men are the subject of observation) the firstnd most primitive approximation to present itself was the will of theods and, after that, the will of those who stood in the mostrominent position- the heroes of history. But we need onlyenetrate to the essence of any historic event- which lies in thectivity of the general mass of men who take part in it- to beonvinced that the will of the historic hero does not control thections of the mass but is itself continually controlled. It mayeem to be a matter of indifference whether we understand theeaning of historical events this way or that; yet there is the sameifference between a man who says that the people of the West moved onhe East because Napoleon wished it and a man who says that thisappened because it had to happen, as there is between those whoeclared that the earth was stationary and that the planets movedound it and those who admitted that they did not know what upheld thearth, but knew there were laws directing its movement and that of thether planets. There is, and can be, no cause of an historical eventxcept the one cause of all causes. But there are laws directingvents, and some of these laws are known to us while we areonscious of others we cannot comprehend. The discovery of theseaws is only possible when possible when we have quite abandoned thettempt to find the cause in the will of some one man, just as theiscovery of the laws of the motion of the planets was possible onlyhen men abandoned the conception of the fixity of the earth.
	The historians consider that, next to the battle of Borodino and theccupation of Moscow by the enemy and its destruction by fire, theost important episode of the war of 1812 was the movement of theussian army from the Ryazana to the Kaluga road and to the Tarutinoamp- the so-called flank march across the Krasnaya Pakhra River. Theyscribe the glory of that achievement of genius to different men andispute as to whom the honor is due. Even foreign historians,ncluding the French, acknowledge the genius of the Russian commandershen they speak of that flank march. But it is hard to understandhy military writers, and following them others, consider this flankarch to be the profound conception of some one man who saved Russiand destroyed Napoleon. In the first place it is hard to understandhere the profundity and genius of this movement lay, for not muchental effort was needed to see that the best position for an armyhen it is not being attacked is where there are most provisions;nd even a dull boy of thirteen could have guessed that the bestosition for an army after its retreat from Moscow in 1812 was onhe Kaluga road. So it is impossible to understand by what reasoninghe historians reach the conclusion that this maneuver was arofound one. And it is even more difficult to understand just whyhey think that this maneuver was calculated to save Russia andestroy the French; for this flank march, had it been preceded,ccompanied, or followed by other circumstances, might have proveduinous to the Russians and salutary for the French. If the positionf the Russian army really began to improve from the time of thatarch, it does not at all follow that the march was the cause of it.
	That flank march might not only have failed to give any advantage tohe Russian army, but might in other circumstances have led to itsestruction. What would have happened had Moscow not burned down? Ifurat had not lost sight of the Russians? If Napoleon had not remainednactive? If the Russian army at Krasnaya Pakhra had given battle asennigsen and Barclay advised? What would have happened had the Frenchttacked the Russians while they were marching beyond the Pakhra? Whatould have happened if on approaching Tarutino, Napoleon hadttacked the Russians with but a tenth of the energy he had shown whene attacked them at Smolensk? What would have happened had therench moved on Petersburg?... In any of these eventualities the flankarch that brought salvation might have proved disastrous.
	The third and most incomprehensible thing is that people studyingistory deliberately avoid seeing that this flank march cannot bettributed to any one man, that no one ever foresaw it, and that ineality, like the retreat from Fili, it did not suggest itself tonyone in its entirety, but resulted- moment by moment, step bytep, event by event- from an endless number of most diverseircumstances and was only seen in its entirety when it had beenccomplished and belonged to the past.
	At the council at Fili the prevailing thought in the minds of theussian commanders was the one naturally suggesting itself, namely, direct retreat by the Nizhni road. In proof of this there is theact that the majority of the council voted for such a retreat, andbove all there is the well-known conversation after the council,etween the commander in chief and Lanskoy, who was in charge of theommissariat department. Lanskoy informed the commander in chiefhat the army supplies were for the most part stored along the Okan the Tula and Ryazan provinces, and that if they retreated on Nizhnihe army would be separated from its supplies by the broad riverka, which cannot be crossed early in winter. This was the firstndication of the necessity of deviating from what had previouslyeemed the most natural course- a direct retreat on Nizhni-Novgorod.he army turned more to the south, along the Ryazan road and nearer tots supplies. Subsequently the in activity of the French (who evenost sight of the Russian army), concern for the safety of the arsenalt Tula, and especially the advantages of drawing nearer to itsupplies caused the army to turn still further south to the Tula road.aving crossed over, by a forced march, to the Tula road beyond theakhra, the Russian commanders intended to remain at Podolsk and hado thought of the Tarutino position; but innumerable circumstances andhe reappearance of French troops who had for a time lost touch withhe Russians, and projects of giving battle, and above all thebundance of provisions in Kaluga province, obliged our army to turntill more to the south and to cross from the Tula to the Kalugaoad and go to Tarutino, which was between the roads along which thoseupplies lay. Just as it is impossible to say when it was decided tobandon Moscow, so it is impossible to say precisely when, or by whom,t was decided to move to Tarutino. Only when the army had gothere, as the result of innumerable and varying forces, did peopleegin to assure themselves that they had desired this movement andong ago foreseen its result.BK13|CH2
	CHAPTER II
	The famous flank movement merely consisted in this: after thedvance of the French had ceased, the Russian army, which had beenontinually retreating straight back from the invaders, deviatedrom that direct course and, not finding itself pursued, was naturallyrawn toward the district where supplies were abundant.
	If instead of imagining to ourselves commanders of genius leadinghe Russian army, we picture that army without any leaders, it couldot have done anything but make a return movement toward Moscow,escribing an arc in the direction where most provisions were to beound and where the country was richest.
	That movement from the Nizhni to the Ryazan, Tula, and Kalugaoads was so natural that even the Russian marauders moved in thatirection, and demands were sent from Petersburg for Kutuzov to takeis army that way. At Tarutino Kutuzov received what was almost aeprimand from the Emperor for having moved his army along theyazan road, and the Emperor's letter indicated to him the veryosition he had already occupied near Kaluga.
	Having rolled like a ball in the direction of the impetus given byhe whole campaign and by the battle of Borodino, the Russian army-hen the strength of that impetus was exhausted and no fresh pushas received- assumed the position natural to it.
	Kutuzov's merit lay, not in any strategic maneuver of genius, ast is called, but in the fact that he alone understood theignificance of what had happened. He alone then understood theeaning of the French army's inactivity, he alone continued tossert that the battle of Borodino had been a victory, he alone- whos commander in chief might have been expected to be eager tottack- employed his whole strength to restrain the Russian armyrom useless engagements.
	The beast wounded at Borodino was lying where the fleeing hunter hadeft him; but whether he was still alive, whether he was strong anderely lying low, the hunter did not know. Suddenly the beast waseard to moan.
	The moan of that wounded beast (the French army) which betrayedts calamitous condition was the sending of Lauriston to Kutuzov'samp with overtures for peace.
	Napoleon, with his usual assurance that whatever entered his headas right, wrote to Kutuzov the first words that occurred to him,hough they were meaningless.
	MONSIEUR LE PRINCE KOUTOUZOV: I am sending one of mydjutants-general to discuss several interesting questions with you. Ieg your Highness to credit what he says to you, especially when hexpresses the sentiment of esteem and special regard I have longntertained for your person. This letter having no other object, Iray God, monsieur le Prince Koutouzov, to keep you in His holy andracious protection!
	                                                NAPOLEON
	MOSCOW, OCTOBER 30, 1812
	Kutuzov replied: "I should be cursed by posterity were I looked ons the initiator of a settlement of any sort. Such is the presentpirit of my nation." But he continued to exert all his powers toestrain his troops from attacking.
	During the month that the French troops were pillaging in Moscow andhe Russian troops were quietly encamped at Tarutino, a change hadaken place in the relative strength of the two armies- both in spiritnd in number- as a result of which the superiority had passed tohe Russian side. Though the condition and numbers of the Frenchrmy were unknown to the Russians, as soon as that change occurred theeed of attacking at once showed itself by countless signs. Theseigns were: Lauriston's mission; the abundance of provisions atarutino; the reports coming in from all sides of the inactivity andisorder of the French; the flow of recruits to our regiments; theine weather; the long rest the Russian soldiers had enjoyed, andhe impatience to do what they had been assembled for, which usuallyhows itself in an army that has been resting; curiosity as to whathe French army, so long lost sight of, was doing; the boldness withhich our outposts now scouted close up to the French stationed atarutino; the news of easy successes gained by peasants anduerrilla troops over the French, the envy aroused by this; the desireor revenge that lay in the heart of every Russian as long as therench were in Moscow, and (above all) a dim consciousness in everyoldier's mind that the relative strength of the armies had changednd that the advantage was now on our side. There was a substantialhange in the relative strength, and an advance had become inevitable.nd at once, as a clock begins to strike and chime as soon as theinute hand has completed a full circle, this change was shown by anncreased activity, whirring, and chiming in the higher spheres.BK13|CH3
	CHAPTER III
	The Russian army was commanded by Kutuzov and his staff, and also byhe Emperor from Petersburg. Before the news of the abandonment ofoscow had been received in Petersburg, a detailed plan of the wholeampaign had been drawn up and sent to Kutuzov for his guidance.hough this plan had been drawn up on the supposition that Moscowas still in our hands, it was approved by the staff and accepted as aasis for action. Kutuzov only replied that movements arranged from distance were always difficult to execute. So fresh instructionsere sent for the solution of difficulties that might bencountered, as well as fresh people who were to watch Kutuzov'sctions and report upon them.
	Besides this, the whole staff of the Russian army was noweorganized. The posts left vacant by Bagration, who had beenilled, and by Barclay, who had gone away in dudgeon, had to beilled. Very serious consideration was given to the question whethert would be better to put A in B's place and B in D's, or on theontrary to put D in A's place, and so on- as if anything more than's or B's satisfaction depended on this.
	As a result of the hostility between Kutuzov and Bennigsen, hishief of Staff, the presence of confidential representatives of themperor, and these transfers, a more than usually complicated playf parties was going on among the staff of the army. A was undermining, D was undermining C, and so on in all possible combinations andermutations. In all these plottings the subject of intrigue wasenerally the conduct of the war, which all these men believed theyere directing; but this affair of the war went on independently ofhem, as it had to go: that is, never in the way people devised, butlowing always from the essential attitude of the masses. Only inhe highest spheres did all these schemes, crossings, andnterminglings appear to be a true reflection of what had to happen.
	Prince Michael Ilarionovich! (wrote the Emperor on the second ofctober in a letter that reached Kutuzov after the battle at Tarutino)ince September 2 Moscow has been in the hands of the enemy. Your lasteports were written on the twentieth, and during all this time notnly has no action been taken against the enemy or for the relief ofhe ancient capital, but according to your last report you have evenetreated farther. Serpukhov is already occupied by an enemyetachment and Tula with its famous arsenal so indispensable to thermy, is in danger. From General Wintzingerode's reports, I see thatn enemy corps of ten thousand men is moving on the Petersburg road.nother corps of several thousand men is moving on Dmitrov. A thirdas advanced along the Vladimir road, and a fourth, ratheronsiderable detachment is stationed between Ruza and Mozhaysk.apoleon himself was in Moscow as late as the twenty-fifth. In view ofll this information, when the enemy has scattered his forces in largeetachments, and with Napoleon and his Guards in Moscow, is itossible that the enemy's forces confronting you are so considerables not to allow of your taking the offensive? On the contrary, he isrobably pursuing you with detachments, or at most with an armyorps much weaker than the army entrusted to you. It would seemhat, availing yourself of these circumstances, you mightdvantageously attack a weaker one and annihilate him, or at leastblige him to retreat, retaining in our hands an important part of therovinces now occupied by the enemy, and thereby averting dangerrom Tula and other towns in the interior. You will be responsiblef the enemy is able to direct a force of any size againstetersburg to threaten this capital in which it has not beenossible to retain many troops; for with the army entrusted to you,nd acting with resolution and energy, you have ample means to averthis fresh calamity. Remember that you have still to answer to ourffended country for the loss of Moscow. You have experienced myeadiness to reward you. That readiness will not weaken in me, but Ind Russia have a right to expect from you all the zeal, firmness, anduccess which your intellect, military talent, and the courage ofhe troops you command justify us in expecting.
	But by the time this letter, which proved that the real relationf the forces had already made itself felt in Petersburg, wasispatched, Kutuzov had found himself unable any longer to restrainhe army he commanded from attacking and a battle had taken place.
	On the second of October a Cossack, Shapovalov, who was outcouting, killed one hare and wounded another. Following the woundedare he made his way far into the forest and came upon the leftlank of Murat's army, encamped there without any precautions. Theossack laughingly told his comrades how he had almost fallen into theands of the French. A cornet, hearing the story, informed hisommander.
	The Cossack was sent for and questioned. The Cossack officers wishedo take advantage of this chance to capture some horses, but one ofhe superior officers, who was acquainted with the higher authorities,eported the incident to a general on the staff.  The state ofhings on the staff had of late been exceedingly strained. Ermolov hadeen to see Bennigsen a few days previously and had entreated him tose his influence with the commander in chief to induce him to takehe offensive.
	"If I did not know you I should think you did not want what youre asking for. I need only advise anything and his Highness is sureo do the opposite," replied Bennigsen.
	The Cossack's report, confirmed by horse patrols who were sentut, was the final proof that events had matured. The tightly coiledpring was released, the clock began to whirr and the chimes tolay. Despite all his supposed power, his intellect, his experience,nd his knowledge of men, Kutuzov- having taken into consideration theossack's report, a note from Bennigsen who sent personal reports tohe Emperor, the wishes he supposed the Emperor to hold, and theact that all the generals expressed the same wish- could no longerheck the inevitable movement, and gave the order to do what heegarded as useless and harmful- gave his approval, that is, to theccomplished fact.BK13|CH4
	CHAPTER IV
	Bennigsen's note and the Cossack's information that the left flankf the French was unguarded were merely final indications that itas necessary to order an attack, and it was fixed for the fifth ofctober.
	On the morning of the fourth of October Kutuzov signed theispositions. Toll read them to Ermolov, asking him to attend to theurther arrangements.
	"All right- all right. I haven't time just now," replied Ermolov,nd left the hut.
	The dispositions drawn up by Toll were very good. As in theusterlitz dispositions, it was written- though not in German thisime:
	"The First Column will march here and here," "the Second Column willarch there and there," and so on; and on paper, all these columnsrrived at their places at the appointed time and destroyed the enemy.verything had been admirably thought out as is usual in dispositions,nd as is always the case, not a single column reached its place athe appointed time.
	When the necessary number of copies of the dispositions had beenrepared, an officer was summoned and sent to deliver them tormolov to deal with. A young officer of the Horse Guards, Kutuzov'srderly, pleased at the importance of the mission entrusted to him,ent to Ermolov's quarters.
	"Gone away," said Ermolov's orderly.
	The officer of the Horse Guards went to a general with whomrmolov was often to be found.
	"No, and the general's out too."
	The officer, mounting his horse, rode off to someone else.
	"No, he's gone out."
	"If only they don't make me responsible for this delay! What auisance it is!" thought the officer, and he rode round the wholeamp. One man said he had seen Ermolov ride past with some otherenerals, others said he must have returned home. The officer searchedill six o'clock in the evening without even stopping to eat.rmolov was nowhere to be found and no one knew where he was. Thefficer snatched a little food at a comrade's, and rode again to theanguard to find Miloradovich. Miloradovich too was away, but heree was told that he had gone to a ball at General Kikin's and thatrmolov was probably there too.
	"But where is it?"
	"Why, there, over at Echkino," said a Cossack officer, pointing to aountry house in the far distance.
	"What, outside our line?"
	"They've put two regiments as outposts, and they're having such apree there, it's awful! Two bands and three sets of singers!"
	The officer rode out beyond our lines to Echkino. While still at aistance he heard as he rode the merry sounds of a soldier's danceong proceeding from the house.
	"In the meadows... in the meadows!" he heard, accompanied byhistling and the sound of a torban, drowned every now and then byhouts. These sounds made his spirits rise, but at the same time heas afraid that he would be blamed for not having executed soonerhe important order entrusted to him. It was already past eight'clock. He dismounted and went up into the porch of a large countryouse which had remained intact between the Russian and French forces.n the refreshment room and the hall, footmen were bustling about withine and viands. Groups of singers stood outside the windows. Thefficer was admitted and immediately saw all the chief generals of thermy together, and among them Ermolov's big imposing figure. Theyll had their coats unbuttoned and were standing in a semicircleith flushed and animated faces, laughing loudly. In the middle of theoom a short handsome general with a red face was dancing the trepakith much spirit and agility.
	"Ha, ha, ha! Bravo, Nicholas Ivanych! Ha, ha, ha!"
	The officer felt that by arriving with important orders at such aoment he was doubly to blame, and he would have preferred to wait;ut one of the generals espied him and, hearing what he had comebout, informed Ermolov.
	Ermolov came forward with a frown on his face and, hearing whathe officer had to say, took the papers from him without a word.
	"You think he went off just by chance?" said a comrade, who was onhe staff that evening, to the officer of the Horse Guards,eferring to Ermolov. "It was a trick. It was done on purpose to getonovnitsyn into trouble. You'll see what a mess there'll beomorrow."BK13|CH5
	CHAPTER V
	Next day the decrepit Kutuzov, having given orders to be calledarly, said his prayers, dressed, and, with an unpleasantonsciousness of having to direct a battle he did not approve of,ot into his caleche and drove from Letashovka (a village three and half miles from Tarutino) to the place where the attacking columnsere to meet. He sat in the caleche, dozing and waking up by turns,nd listening for any sound of firing on the right as an indicationhat the action had begun. But all was still quiet. A damp dull autumnorning was just dawning. On approaching Tarutino Kutuzov noticedavalrymen leading their horses to water across the road along whiche was driving. Kutuzov looked at them searchingly, stopped hisarriage, and inquired what regiment they belonged to. They belongedo a column that should have been far in front and in ambush longefore then. "It may be a mistake," thought the old commander inhief. But a little further on he saw infantry regiments with theirrms piled and the soldiers, only partly dressed, eating their ryeorridge and carrying fuel. He sent for an officer. The officereported that no order to advance had been received.
	"How! Not rec..." Kutuzov began, but checked himself immediately andent for a senior officer. Getting out of his caleche, he waitedith drooping head and breathing heavily, pacing silently up and down.hen Eykhen, the officer of the general staff whom he had summoned,ppeared, Kutuzov went purple in the face, not because that officeras to blame for the mistake, but because he was an object ofufficient importance for him to vent his wrath on. Trembling andanting the old man fell into that state of fury in which he sometimessed to roll on the ground, and he fell upon Eykhen, threatening himith his hands, shouting and loading him with gross abuse. Anotheran, Captain Brozin, who happened to turn up and who was not at all tolame, suffered the same fate.
	"What sort of another blackguard are you? I'll have you shot!coundrels!" yelled Kutuzov in a hoarse voice, waving his arms andeeling.
	He was suffering physically. He, the commander in chief, a Sereneighness who everybody said possessed powers such as no man had everad in Russia, to be placed in this position- made the laughingstockf the whole army! "I needn't have been in such a hurry to praybout today, or have kept awake thinking everything over all night,"hought he to himself. "When I was a chit of an officer no one wouldave dared to mock me so... and now!" He was in a state of physicaluffering as if from corporal punishment, and could not avoidxpressing it by cries of anger and distress. But his strength soonegan to fail him, and looking about him, conscious of having saiduch that was amiss, he again got into his caleche and drove back inilence.
	His wrath, once expended, did not return, and blinking feebly heistened to excuses and self-justifications (Ermolov did not come toee him till the next day) and to the insistence of Bennigsen,onovnitsyn, and Toll that the movement that had miscarried shoulde executed next day. And once more Kutuzov had to consent.BK13|CH6
	CHAPTER VI
	Next day the troops assembled in their appointed places in thevening and advanced during the night. It was an autumn night withark purple clouds, but no rain. The ground was damp but not muddy,nd the troops advanced noiselessly, only occasionally a jingling ofhe artillery could be faintly heard. The men were forbidden to talkut loud, to smoke their pipes, or to strike a light, and they triedo prevent their horses neighing. The secrecy of the undertakingeightened its charm and they marched gaily. Some columns,upposing. they had reached their destination, halted, piled arms, andettled down on the cold ground, but the majority marched all nightnd arrived at places where they evidently should not have been.
	Only Count Orlov-Denisov with his Cossacks (the least importantetachment of all) got to his appointed place at the right time.his detachment halted at the outskirts of a forest, on the patheading from the village of Stromilova to Dmitrovsk.
	Toward dawn, Count Orlov-Denisov, who had dozed off, was awakened by deserter from the French army being brought to him. This was aolish sergeant of Poniatowski's corps, who explained in Polish thate had come over because he had been slighted in the service: thate ought long ago to have been made an officer, that he was braverhan any of them, and so he had left them and wished to pay themut. He said that Murat was spending the night less than a mile fromhere they were, and that if they would let him have a convoy of aundred men he would capture him alive. Count Orlov-Denisovonsulted his fellow officers.
	The offer was too tempting to be refused. Everyone volunteered to gond everybody advised making the attempt. After much disputing andrguing, Major-General Grekov with two Cossack regiments decided to goith the Polish sergeant.
	"Now, remember," said Count Orlov-Denisov to the sergeant atarting, "if you have been lying I'll have you hanged like a dog;ut if it's true you shall have a hundred gold pieces!"
	Without replying, the sergeant, with a resolute air, mounted andode away with Grekov whose men had quickly assembled. Theyisappeared into the forest, and Count Orlov-Denisov, having seenrekov off, returned, shivering from the freshness of the early dawnnd excited by what he had undertaken on his own responsibility, andegan looking at the enemy camp, now just visible in the deceptiveight of dawn and the dying campfires. Our columns ought to have beguno appear on an open declivity to his right. He looked in thatirection, but though the columns would have been visible quite farff, they were not to be seen. It seemed to the count that things wereeginning to stir in the French camp, and his keen-sighted adjutantonfirmed this.
	"Oh, it is really too late," said Count Orlov, looking at the camp.
	As often happens when someone we have trusted is no longer beforeur eyes, it suddenly seemed quite clear and obvious to him that theergeant was an impostor, that he had lied, and that the whole Russianttack would be ruined by the absence of those two regiments, which heould lead away heaven only knew where. How could one capture aommander in chief from among such a mass of troops!
	"I am sure that rascal was lying," said the count.
	"They can still be called back," said one of his suite, who likeount Orlov felt distrustful of the adventure when he looked at thenemy's camp.
	"Eh? Really... what do you think? Should we let them go on or not?"
	"Will you have them fetched back?"
	"Fetch them back, fetch them back!" said Count Orlov with suddenetermination, looking at his watch. "It will be too late. It is quiteight."
	And the adjutant galloped through the forest after Grekov. Whenrekov returned, Count Orlov-Denisov, excited both by the abandonedttempt and by vainly awaiting the infantry columns that still did notppear, as well as by the proximity of the enemy, resolved to advance.ll his men felt the same excitement.
	"Mount!" he commanded in a whisper. The men took their places androssed themselves.... "Forward, with God's aid!"
	"Hurrah-ah-ah!" reverberated in the forest, and the Cossackompanies, trailing their lances and advancing one after another as ifoured out of a sack, dashed gaily across the brook toward the camp.
	One desperate, frightened yell from the first French soldier who sawhe Cossacks, and all who were in the camp, undressed and only justaking up, ran off in all directions, abandoning cannons, muskets, andorses.
	Had the Cossacks pursued the French, without heeding what was behindnd around them, they would have captured Murat and everythinghere. That was what the officers desired. But it was impossible toake the Cossacks budge when once they had got booty and prisoners.one of them listened to orders. Fifteen hundred prisoners andhirty-eight guns were taken on the spot, besides standards andwhat seemed most important to the Cossacks) horses, saddles,orsecloths, and the like. All this had to be dealt with, therisoners and guns secured, the booty divided- not without somehouting and even a little themselves- and it was on this that theossacks all busied themselves.
	The French, not being farther pursued, began to recoverhemselves: they formed into detachments and began firing.rlov-Denisov, still waiting for the other columns to arrive, advancedo further.
	Meantime, according to the dispositions which said that "the Firstolumn will march" and so on, the infantry of the belated columns,ommanded by Bennigsen and directed by Toll, had started in duerder and, as always happens, had got somewhere, but not to theirppointed places. As always happens the men, starting cheerfully,egan to halt; murmurs were heard, there was a sense of confusion, andinally a backward movement. Adjutants and generals galloped about,houted, grew angry, quarreled, said they had come quite wrong andere late, gave vent to a little abuse, and at last gave it all up andent forward, simply to get somewhere. "We shall get somewhere orther!" And they did indeed get somewhere, though not to their rightlaces; a few eventually even got to their right place, but too lateo be of any use and only in time to be fired at. Toll, who in thisattle played the part of Weyrother at Austerlitz, gallopedssiduously from place to place, finding everything upside downverywhere. Thus he stumbled on Bagovut's corps in a wood when itas already broad daylight, though the corps should long before haveoined Orlov-Denisov. Excited and vexed by the failure and supposinghat someone must be responsible for it, Toll galloped up to theommander of the corps and began upbraiding him severely, sayinghat he ought to be shot. General Bagovut, a fighting old soldier oflacid temperament, being also upset by all the delay, confusion,nd cross-purposes, fell into a rage to everybody's surprise and quiteontrary to his usual character and said disagreeable things to Toll.
	"I prefer not to take lessons from anyone, but I can die with my mens well as anybody," he said, and advanced with a single division.
	Coming out onto a field under the enemy's fire, this brave generalent straight ahead, leading his men under fire, without consideringn his agitation whether going into action now, with a singleivision, would be of any use or no. Danger, cannon balls, and bulletsere just what he needed in his angry mood. One of the first bulletsilled him, and other bullets killed many of his men. And his divisionemained under fire for some time quite uselessly.BK13|CH7
	CHAPTER VII
	Meanwhile another column was to have attacked the French from theront, but Kutuzov accompanied that column. He well knew thatothing but confusion would come of this battle undertaken against hisill, and as far as was in his power held the troops back. He didot advance.
	He rode silently on his small gray horse, indolently answeringuggestions that they should attack.
	"The word attack is always on your tongue, but you don't see that were unable to execute complicated maneuvers," said he toiloradovich who asked permission to advance.
	"We couldn't take Murat prisoner this morning or get to the place inime, and nothing can be done now!" he replied to someone else.
	When Kutuzov was informed that at the French rear- where accordingo the reports of the Cossacks there had previously been nobody- thereere now two battalions of Poles, he gave a sidelong glance at Ermolovho was behind him and to whom he had not spoken since the previousay.
	"You see! They are asking to attack and making plans of all kinds,ut as soon as one gets to business nothing is ready, and the enemy,orewarned, takes measures accordingly."
	Ermolov screwed up his eyes and smiled faintly on hearing theseords. He understood that for him the storm had blown over, and thatutuzov would content himself with that hint.
	"He's having a little fun at my expense," said Ermolov softly,udging with his knee Raevski who was at his side.
	Soon after this, Ermolov moved up to Kutuzov and respectfullyemarked:
	"It is not too late yet, your Highness- the enemy has not gone away-f you were to order an attack! If not, the Guards will not so much asee a little smoke."
	Kutuzov did not reply, but when they reported to him that Murat'sroops were in retreat he ordered an advance, though at everyundred paces he halted for three quarters of an hour.
	The whole battle consisted in what Orlov-Denisov's Cossacks hadone: the rest of the army merely lost some hundreds of men uselessly.
	In consequence of this battle Kutuzov received a diamond decoration,nd Bennigsen some diamonds and a hundred thousand rubles, others alsoeceived pleasant recognitions corresponding to their variousrades, and following the battle fresh changes were made in the staff.
	"That's how everything is done with us, all topsy-turvy!" said theussian officers and generals after the Tarutino battle, letting it benderstood that some fool there is doing things all wrong but thate ourselves should not have done so, just as people speak today.ut people who talk like that either do not know what they are talkingbout or deliberately deceive themselves. No battle- Tarutino,orodino, or Austerlitz- takes place as those who planned itnticipated. That is an essential condition.
	A countless number of free forces (for nowhere is man freer thanuring a battle, where it is a question of life and death) influencehe course taken by the fight, and that course never can be known indvance and never coincides with the direction of any one force.
	If many simultaneously and variously directed forces act on aiven body, the direction of its motion cannot coincide with any onef those forces, but will always be a mean- what in mechanics isepresented by the diagonal of a parallelogram of forces.
	If in the descriptions given by historians, especially Frenchnes, we find their wars and battles carried out in accordance withreviously formed plans, the only conclusion to be drawn is that thoseescriptions are false.
	The battle of Tarutino obviously did not attain the aim Toll hadn view- to lead the troops into action in the order prescribed by theispositions; nor that which Count Orlov-Denisov may have had in view-o take Murat prisoner; nor the result of immediately destroying thehole corps, which Bennigsen and others may have had in view; norhe aim of the officer who wished to go into action to distinguishimself; nor that of the Cossack who wanted more booty than he got,nd so on. But if the aim of the battle was what actually resulted andhat all the Russians of that day desired- to drive the French outf Russia and destroy their army- it is quite clear that the battle ofarutino, just because of its incongruities, was exactly what wasanted at that stage of the campaign. It would be difficult and evenmpossible to imagine any result more opportune than the actualutcome of this battle. With a minimum of effort and insignificantosses, despite the greatest confusion, the most important resultsf the whole campaign were attained: the transition from retreat todvance, an exposure of the weakness of the French, and thedministration of that shock which Napoleon's army had only awaited toegin its flight.BK13|CH8
	CHAPTER VIII
	Napoleon enters Moscow after the brilliant victory de la Moskowa;here can be no doubt about the victory for the battlefield remains inhe hands of the French. The Russians retreat and abandon theirncient capital. Moscow, abounding in provisions, arms, munitions, andncalculable wealth, is in Napoleon's hands. The Russian army, onlyalf the strength of the French, does not make a single attempt tottack for a whole month. Napoleon's position is most brilliant. Hean either fall on the Russian army with double its strength andestroy it; negotiate an advantageous peace, or in case of a refusalake a menacing move on Petersburg, or even, in the case of a reverse,eturn to Smolensk or Vilna; or remain in Moscow; in short, no specialenius would seem to be required to retain the brilliant positionhe French held at that time. For that, only very simple and easyteps were necessary: not to allow the troops to loot, to prepareinter clothing- of which there was sufficient in Moscow for the wholermy- and methodically to collect the provisions, of whichaccording to the French historians) there were enough in Moscow toupply the whole army for six months. Yet Napoleon, that greatest ofll geniuses, who the historians declare had control of the army, tookone of these steps.
	He not merely did nothing of the kind, but on the contrary he usedis power to select the most foolish and ruinous of all the coursespen to him. Of all that Napoleon might have done: wintering inoscow, advancing on Petersburg or on Nizhni-Novgorod, or retiringy a more northerly or more southerly route (say by the road Kutuzovfterwards took), nothing more stupid or disastrous can be imaginedhan what he actually did. He remained in Moscow till October, lettinghe troops plunder the city; then, hesitating whether to leave aarrison behind him, he quitted Moscow, approached Kutuzov withoutoining battle, turned to the right and reached Malo-Yaroslavets,gain without attempting to break through and take the road Kutuzovook, but retiring instead to Mozhaysk along the devastated Smolenskoad. Nothing more stupid than that could have been devised, or moreisastrous for the army, as the sequel showed. Had Napoleon's aim beeno destroy his army, the most skillful strategist could hardly haveevised any series of actions that would so completely haveccomplished that purpose, independently of anything the Russianrmy might do.
	Napoleon, the man of genius, did this! But to say that heestroyed his army because he wished to, or because he was verytupid, would be as unjust as to say that he had brought his troops tooscow because he wished to and because he was very clever and aenius.
	In both cases his personal activity, having no more force than theersonal activity of any soldier, merely coincided with the lawshat guided the event.
	The historians quite falsely represent Napoleon's faculties asaving weakened in Moscow, and do so only because the results didot justify his actions. He employed all his ability and strength too the best he could for himself and his army, as he had donereviously and as he did subsequently in 1813. His activity at thatime was no less astounding than it was in Egypt, in Italy, inustria, and in Prussia. We do not know for certain in how far hisenius was genuine in Egypt- where forty centuries looked down uponis grandeur- for his great exploits there are all told us byrenchmen. We cannot accurately estimate his genius in Austria orrussia, for we have to draw our information from French or Germanources, and the incomprehensible surrender of whole corps withoutighting and of fortresses without a siege must incline Germans toecognize his genius as the only explanation of the war carried onn Germany. But we, thank God, have no need to recognize his genius inrder to hide our shame. We have paid for the right to look at theatter plainly and simply, and we will not abandon that right.
	His activity in Moscow was as amazing and as full of genius aslsewhere. Order after order order and plan after plan were issuedy him from the time he entered Moscow till the time he left it. Thebsence of citizens and of a deputation, and even the burning ofoscow, did not disconcert him. He did not lose sight either of theelfare of his army or of the doings of the enemy, or of the welfaref the people of Russia, or of the direction of affairs in Paris, orf diplomatic considerations concerning the terms of the anticipatedeace.BK13|CH9
	CHAPTER IX
	With regard to military matters, Napoleon immediately on his entrynto Moscow gave General Sabastiani strict orders to observe theovements of the Russian army, sent army corps out along the differentoads, and charged Murat to find Kutuzov. Then he gave carefulirections about the fortification of the Kremlin, and drew up arilliant plan for a future campaign over the whole map of Russia.
	With regard to diplomatic questions, Napoleon summoned Captainakovlev, who had been robbed and was in rags and did not know howo get out of Moscow, minutely explained to him his whole policy andis magnanimity, and having written a letter to the Emperorlexander in which he considered it his duty to inform his Friendnd Brother that Rostopchin had managed affairs badly in Moscow, heispatched Yakovlev to Petersburg.
	Having similarly explained his views and his magnanimity toutolmin, he dispatched that old man also to Petersburg to negotiate.
	With regard to legal matters, immediately after the fires he gaverders to find and execute the incendiaries. And the scoundrelostopchin was punished by an order to burn down his houses.
	With regard to administrative matters, Moscow was granted aonstitution. A municipality was established and the followingnnouncement issued:
	                      INHABITANTS OF MOSCOW!
	Your misfortunes are cruel, but His Majesty the Emperor and Kingesires to arrest their course. Terrible examples have taught youow he punishes disobedience and crime. Strict measures have beenaken to put an end to disorder and to re-establish public security. Aaternal administration, chosen from among yourselves, will formour municipality or city government. It will take care of you, ofour needs, and of your welfare. Its members will be distinguishedy a red ribbon worn across the shoulder, and the mayor of the cityill wear a white belt as well. But when not on duty they will onlyear a red ribbon round the left arm.
	The city police is established on its former footing, and betterrder already prevails in consequence of its activity. Theovernment has appointed two commissaries general, or chiefs ofolice, and twenty commissaries or captains of wards have beenppointed to the different wards of the city. You will recognizehem by the white ribbon they will wear on the left arm. Severalhurches of different denominations are open, and divine service iserformed in them unhindered. Your fellow citizens are returning everyay to their homes. and orders have been given that they should findn them the help and protection due to their misfortunes. These arehe measures the government has adopted to re-establish order andelieve youp condition. But to achieve this aim it is necessary thatou should add your efforts and should, if possible, forget theisfortunes you have suffered, should entertain the hope of a lessruel fate, should be certain that inevitable and ignominious deathwaits those who make any attempt on your persons or on what remainsf your property, and finally that you should not doubt that theseill be safeguarded, since such is the will of the greatest and mostust of monarchs. Soldiers and citizens, of whatever nation you maye, re-establish public confidence, the source of the welfare of atate, live like brothers, render mutual aid and protection one tonother, unite to defeat the intentions of the evil-minded, obey theilitary and civil authorities, and your tears will soon cease tolow!
	With regard to supplies for the army, Napoleon decreed that allhe troops in turn should enter Moscow a la maraude* to obtainrovisions for themselves, so that the army might have its futurerovided for.
	*As looters.
	With regard to religion, Napoleon ordered the priests to berought back and services to be again performed in the churches.
	With regard to commerce and to provisioning the army, theollowing was placarded everywhere:
	                           PROCLAMATION!
	You, peaceful inhabitants of Moscow, artisans and workmen whomisfortune has driven from the city, and you scattered tillers ofhe soil, still kept out in the fields by groundless fear, listen!ranquillity is returning to this capital and order is beingestored in it. Your fellow countrymen are emerging boldly fromheir hiding places on finding that they are respected. Any violenceo them or to their property is promptly punished. His Majesty themperor and King protects them, and considers no one among you hisnemy except those who disobey his orders. He desires to end yourisfortunes and restore you to your homes and families. Respond,herefore, to his benevolent intentions and come to us without fear.nhabitants, return with confidence to your abodes! You will soon findeans of satisfying your needs. Craftsmen and industrious artisans,eturn to your work, your houses, your shops, where the protectionf guards awaits you! You shall receive proper pay for your work.nd lastly you too, peasants, come from the forests where you areiding in terror, return to your huts without fear, in fullssurance that you will find protection! Markets are established inhe city where peasants can bring their surplus supplies and theroducts of the soil. The government has taken the following stepso ensure freedom of sale for them: (1) From today, peasants,usbandmen, and those living in the neighborhood of Moscow may withoutny danger bring their supplies of all kinds to two appointed markets,f which one is on the Mokhovaya Street and the other at the Provisionarket. (2) Such supplies will be bought from them at such prices aseller and buyer may agree on, and if a seller is unable to obtain aair price he will be free to take his goods back to his village ando one may hinder him under any pretense. (3) Sunday and Wednesdayf each week are appointed as the chief market days and to that end sufficient number of troops will be stationed along the highroads onuesdays and Saturdays at such distances from the town as to protecthe carts. (4) Similar measures will be taken that peasants with theirarts and horses may meet with no hindrance on their return journey.5) Steps will immediately be taken to re-establish ordinary trading.
	Inhabitants of the city and villages, and you, workingmen andrtisans, to whatever nation you belong, you are called on to carryut the paternal intentions of His Majesty the Emperor and King and too-operate with him for the public welfare! Lay your respect andonfidence at his feet and do not delay to unite with us!
	With the object of raising the spirits of the troops and of theeople, reviews were constantly held and rewards distributed. Themperor rode through the streets to comfort the inhabitants, and,espite his preoccupation with state affairs, himself visited theheaters that were established by his order.
	In regard to philanthropy, the greatest virtue of crowned heads,apoleon also did all in his power. He caused the words Maison de maere to be inscribed on the charitable institutions, thereby combiningender filial affection with the majestic benevolence of a monarch. Heisited the Foundling Hospital and, allowing the orphans saved byim to kiss his white hands, graciously conversed with Tutolmin. Then,s Thiers eloquently recounts, he ordered his soldiers to be paid inorged Russian money which he had prepared: "Raising the use ofhese means by an act worthy of himself and of the French army, he letelief be distributed to those who had been burned out. But as foodas too precious to be given to foreigners, who were for the most partnemies, Napoleon preferred to supply them with money with which tourchase food from outside, and had paper rubles distributed to them."
	With reference to army discipline, orders were continually beingssued to inflict severe punishment for the nonperformance of militaryuties and to suppress robbery.BK13|CH10
	CHAPTER X
	But strange to say, all these measures, efforts, and plans- whichere not at all worse than others issued in similar circumstances- didot affect the essence of the matter but, like the hands of a clocketached from the mechanism, swung about in an arbitrary and aimlessay without engaging the cogwheels.
	With reference to the military side- the plan of campaign- that workf genius of which Thiers remarks that, "His genius never devisednything more profound, more skillful, or more admirable," andnters into a polemic with M. Fain to prove that this work of geniusust be referred not to the fourth but to the fifteenth of October-hat plan never was or could be executed, for it was quite out ofouch with the facts of the case. The fortifying of the Kremlin, forhich la Mosquee (as Napoleon termed the church of Basil theeatified) was to have been razed to the ground, proved quite useless.he mining of the Kremlin only helped toward fulfilling Napoleon'sish that it should be blown up when he left Moscow- as a childants the floor on which he has hurt himself to be beaten. The pursuitf the Russian army, about which Napoleon was so concerned, producedn unheard-of result. The French generals lost touch with theussian army of sixty thousand men, and according to Thiers it wasnly eventually found, like a lost pin, by the skill- and apparentlyhe genius- of Murat.
	With reference to diplomacy, all Napoleon's arguments as to hisagnanimity and justice, both to Tutolmin and to Yakovlev (whose chiefoncern was to obtain a greatcoat and a conveyance), proved useless;lexander did not receive these envoys and did not reply to theirmbassage.
	With regard to legal matters, after the execution of the supposedncendiaries the rest of Moscow burned down.
	With regard to administrative matters, the establishment of aunicipality did not stop the robberies and was only of use to certaineople who formed part of that municipality and under pretext ofreserving order looted Moscow or saved their own property fromeing looted.
	With regard to religion, as to which in Egypt matters had soasily been settled by Napoleon's visit to a mosque, no results werechieved. Two or three priests who were found in Moscow did try toarry out Napoleon's wish, but one of them was slapped in the facey a French soldier while conducting service, and a French officialeported of another that: "The priest whom I found and invited toay Mass cleaned and locked up the church. That night the doors weregain broken open, the padlocks smashed, the books mutilated, andther disorders perpetrated."
	With reference to commerce, the proclamation to industriousorkmen and to peasants evoked no response. There were nondustrious workmen, and the peasants caught the commissaries whoentured too far out of town with the proclamation and killed them.
	As to the theaters for the entertainment of the people and theroops, these did not meet with success either. The theaters set up inhe Kremlin and in Posnyakov's house were closed again at once becausehe actors and actresses were robbed.
	Even philanthropy did not have the desired effect. The genuine asell as the false paper money which flooded Moscow lost its value. Therench, collecting booty, cared only for gold. Not only was theaper money valueless which Napoleon so graciously distributed tohe unfortunate, but even silver lost its value in relation to gold.
	But the most amazing example of the ineffectiveness of the ordersiven by the authorities at that time was Napoleon's attempt to stophe looting and re-establish discipline.
	This is what the army authorities were reporting:
	"Looting continues in the city despite the decrees against it. Orders not yet restored and not a single merchant is carrying on traden a lawful manner. The sutlers alone venture to trade, and theyell stolen goods."
	"The neighborhood of my ward continues to be pillaged by soldiers ofhe 3rd Corps who, not satisfied with taking from the unfortunatenhabitants hiding in the cellars the little they have left, even havehe ferocity to wound them with their sabers, as I have repeatedlyitnessed."
	"Nothing new, except that the soldiers are robbing and pillaging-ctober 9."
	"Robbery and pillaging continue. There is a band of thieves in ouristrict who ought to be arrested by a strong force- October 11."
	"The Emperor is extremely displeased that despite the strictrders to stop pillage, parties of marauding Guards are continuallyeen returning to the Kremlin. Among the Old Guard disorder andillage were renewed more violently than ever yesterday evening,ast night, and today. The Emperor sees with regret that the pickedoldiers appointed to guard his person, who should set an example ofiscipline, carry disobedience to such a point that they break intohe cellars and stores containing army supplies. Others have disgracedhemselves to the extent of disobeying sentinels and officers, andave abused and beaten them."
	"The Grand Marshal of the palace," wrote the governor, "complainsitterly that in spite of repeated orders, the soldiers continue toommit nuisances in all the courtyards and even under the very windowsf the Emperor."
	That army, like a herd of cattle run wild and trampling underfoothe provender which might have saved it from starvation, disintegratednd perished with each additional day it remained in Moscow. But itid not go away.
	It began to run away only when suddenly seized by a panic causedy the capture of transport trains on the Smolensk road, and by theattle of Tarutino. The news of that battle of Tarutino,nexpectedly received by Napoleon at a review, evoked in him aesire to punish the Russians (Thiers says), and he issued the orderor departure which the whole army was demanding.
	Fleeing from Moscow the soldiers took with them everything theyad stolen. Napoleon, too, carried away his own personal tresor, butn seeing the baggage trains that impeded the army, he was (Thiersays) horror-struck. And yet with his experience of war he did notrder all the superfluous vehicles to be burned, as he had done withhose of a certain marshal when approaching Moscow. He gazed at thealeches and carriages in which soldiers were riding and remarked thatt was a very good thing, as those vehicles could be used to carryrovisions, the sick, and the wounded.
	The plight of the whole army resembled that of a wounded animalhich feels it is perishing and does not know what it is doing. Totudy the skillful tactics and aims of Napoleon and his army fromhe time it entered Moscow till it was destroyed is like studyinghe dying leaps and shudders of a mortally wounded animal. Veryften a wounded animal, hearing a rustle, rushes straight at theunter's gun, runs forward and back again, and hastens its own end.apoleon, under pressure from his whole army, did the same thing.he rustle of the battle of Tarutino frightened the beast, and itushed forward onto the hunter's gun, reached him, turned back, andinally- like any wild beast- ran back along the mostisadvantageous and dangerous path, where the old scent was familiar.
	During the whole of that period Napoleon, who seems to us to haveeen the leader of all these movements- as the figurehead of a shipay seem to a savage to guide the vessel- acted like a child who,olding a couple of strings inside a carriage, thinks he is drivingt.BK13|CH11
	CHAPTER XI
	Early in the morning of the sixth of October Pierre went out ofhe shed, and on returning stopped by the door to play with a littlelue-gray dog, with a long body and short bandy legs, that jumpedbout him. This little dog lived in their shed, sleeping besidearataev at night; it sometimes made excursions into the town butlways returned again. Probably it had never had an owner, and ittill belonged to nobody and had no name. The French called it Azor;he soldier who told stories called it Femgalka; Karataev and othersalled it Gray, or sometimes Flabby. Its lack of a master, a name,r even of a breed or any definite color did not seem to trouble thelue-gray dog in the least. Its furry tail stood up firm and rounds a plume, its bandy legs served it so well that it would oftenracefully lift a hind leg and run very easily and quickly on threeegs, as if disdaining to use all four. Everything pleased it. Nowt would roll on its back, yelping with delight, now bask in the sunith a thoughtful air of importance, and now frolic about playing with chip of wood or a straw.
	Pierre's attire by now consisted of a dirty torn shirt (the onlyemnant of his former clothing), a pair of soldier's trousers which byarataev's advice he tied with string round the ankles for warmth, and peasant coat and cap. Physically he had changed much during thisime. He no longer seemed stout, though he still had the appearance ofolidity and strength hereditary in his family. A beard and mustacheovered the lower part of his face, and a tangle of hair, infestedith lice, curled round his head like a cap. The look of his eyesas resolute, calm, and animatedly alert, as never before. Theormer slackness which had shown itself even in his eyes was noweplaced by an energetic readiness for action and resistance. His feetere bare.
	Pierre first looked down the field across which vehicles andorsemen were passing that morning, then into the distance acrosshe river, then at the dog who was pretending to be in earnest aboutiting him, and then at his bare feet which he placed with pleasure inarious positions, moving his dirty thick big toes. Every time heooked at his bare feet a smile of animated self-satisfactionlitted across his face. The sight of them reminded him of all head experienced and learned during these weeks and this recollectionas pleasant to him.
	For some days the weather had been calm and clear with slight frostsn the mornings- what is called an "old wives' summer."
	In the sunshine the air was warm, and that warmth was particularlyleasant with the invigorating freshness of the morning frost still inhe air.
	On everything- far and near- lay the magic crystal glitter seen onlyt that time autumn. The Sparrow Hills were visible in the distance,ith the village, the church, and the large white house. The barerees, the sand, the bricks and roofs of the houses, the greenhurch spire, and the corners of the white house in the distance,ll stood out in the transparent air in most delicate outline and withnnatural clearness. Near by could be seen the familiar ruins of aalf-burned mansion occupied by the French, with lilac bushes stillhowing dark green beside the fence. And even that ruined and befouledouse- which in dull weather was repulsively ugly- seemed quietlyeautiful now, in the clear, motionless brilliance.
	A French corporal, with coat unbuttoned in a homely way, akullcap on his head, and a short pipe in his mouth, came fromehind a corner of the shed and approached Pierre with a friendlyink.
	"What sunshine, Monsieur Kiril!" (Their name for Pierre.) "Eh?ust like spring!"
	And the corporal leaned against the door and offered Pierre hisipe, though whenever he offered it Pierre always declined it.
	"To be on the march in such weather..." he began.
	Pierre inquired what was being said about leaving, and theorporal told him that nearly all the troops were starting and thereught to be an order about the prisoners that day. Sokolov, one of theoldiers in the shed with Pierre, was dying, and Pierre told theorporal that something should be done about him. The corporal repliedhat Pierre need not worry about that as they had an ambulance and aermanent hospital and arrangements would be made for the sick, andhat in general everything that could happen had been foreseen byhe authorities.
	"Besides, Monsieur Kiril, you have only to say a word to theaptain, you know. He is a man who never forgets anything. Speak tohe captain when he makes his round, he will do anything for you."
	(The captain of whom the corporal spoke often had long chats withierre and showed him all sorts of favors.)
	"'You see, St. Thomas,' he said to me the other day. 'Monsieur Kirils a man of education, who speaks French. He is a Russian seigneur whoas had misfortunes, but he is a man. He knows what's what.... If heants anything and asks me, he won't get a refusal. When one hastudied, you see, one likes education and well-bred people.' It is forour sake I mention it, Monsieur Kiril. The other day if it had noteen for you that affair would have ended ill."
	And after chatting a while longer, the corporal went away. (Theffair he had alluded to had happened a few days before- a fightetween the prisoners and the French soldiers, in which Pierre haducceeded in pacifying his comrades.) Some of the prisoners who hadeard Pierre talking to the corporal immediately asked what therenchman had said. While Pierre was repeating what he had been toldbout the army leaving Moscow, a thin, sallow, tattered French soldierame up to the door of the shed. Rapidly and timidly raising hisingers to his forehead by way of greeting, he asked Pierre whetherhe soldier Platoche to whom he had given a shirt to sew was in thathed.
	A week before the French had had boot leather and linen issued tohem, which they had given out to the prisoners to make up intooots and shirts for them.
	"Ready, ready, dear fellow!" said Karataev, coming out with a neatlyolded shirt.
	Karataev, on account of the warm weather and for convenience atork, was wearing only trousers and a tattered shirt as black as soot.is hair was bound round, workman fashion, with a wisp of lime-treeast, and his round face seemed rounder and pleasanter than ever.
	"A promise is own brother to performance! I said Friday and heret is, ready," said Platon, smiling and unfolding the shirt he hadewn.
	The Frenchman glanced around uneasily and then, as if overcoming hisesitation, rapidly threw off his uniform and put on the shirt. He had long, greasy, flowered silk waistcoat next to his sallow, thinare body, but no shirt. He was evidently afraid the prisoners lookingn would laugh at him, and thrust his head into the shirt hurriedly.one of the prisoners said a word.
	"See, it fits well!" Platon kept repeating, pulling the shirttraight.
	The Frenchman, having pushed his head and hands through, withoutaising his eyes, looked down at the shirt and examined the seams.
	"You see, dear man, this is not a sewing shop, and I had no properools; and, as they say, one needs a tool even to kill a louse,"aid Platon with one of his round smiles, obviously pleased with hisork.
	"It's good, quite good, thank you," said the Frenchman, in French,but there must be some linen left over.
	"It will fit better still when it sets to your body," said Karataev,till admiring his handiwork. "You'll be nice and comfortable...."
	"Thanks, thanks, old fellow.... But the bits left over?" said therenchman again and smiled. He took out an assignation ruble notend gave it to Karataev. "But give me the pieces that are over."
	Pierre saw that Platon did not want to understand what the Frenchmanas saying, and he looked on without interfering. Karataev thanked therenchman for the money and went on admiring his own work. Therenchman insisted on having the pieces returned that were left overnd asked Pierre to translate what he said.
	"What does he want the bits for?" said Karataev. "They'd make fineeg bands for us. Well, never mind."
	And Karataev, with a suddenly changed and saddened expression,ook a small bundle of scraps from inside his shirt and gave it to therenchman without looking at him. "Oh dear!" muttered Karataev andent away. The Frenchman looked at the linen, considered for a moment,hen looked inquiringly at Pierre and, as if Pierre's look had toldim something, suddenly blushed and shouted in a squeaky voice:
	"Platoche! Eh, Platoche! Keep them yourself!" And handing back thedd bits he turned and went out.
	"There, look at that," said Karataev, swaying his head. "People saidhey were not Christians, but they too have souls. It's what the oldolk used to say: 'A sweating hand's an open hand, a dry hand'slose.' He's naked, but yet he's given it back."
	Karataev smiled thoughtfully and was silent awhile looking at theieces.
	"But they'll make grand leg bands, dear friend," he said, and wentack into the shed.BK13|CH12
	CHAPTER XII
	Four weeks had passed since Pierre had been taken prisoner andhough the French had offered to move him from the men's to thefficers' shed, he had stayed in the shed where he was first put.
	In burned and devastated Moscow Pierre experienced almost thextreme limits of privation a man can endure; but thanks to hishysical strength and health, of which he had till then beennconscious, and thanks especially to the fact that the privationsame so gradually that it was impossible to say when they began, hendured his position not only lightly but joyfully. And just at thisime he obtained the tranquillity and ease of mind he had formerlytriven in vain to reach. He had long sought in different ways thatranquillity of mind, that inner harmony which had so impressed him inhe soldiers at the battle of Borodino. He had sought it inhilanthropy, in Freemasonry, in the dissipations of town life, inine, in heroic feats of self-sacrifice, and in romantic love foratasha; he had sought it by reasoning- and all these quests andxperiments had failed him. And now without thinking about it he hadound that peace and inner harmony only through the horror of death,hrough privation, and through what he recognized in Karataev.
	Those dreadful moments he had lived through at the executions had ast were forever washed away from his imagination and memory thegitating thoughts and feelings that had formerly seemed so important.t did not now occur to him to think of Russia, or the war, orolitics, or Napoleon. It was plain to him that all these thingsere no business of his, and that he was not called on to judgeoncerning them and therefore could not do so. "Russia and summereather are not bound together," he thought, repeating words ofarataev's which he found strangely consoling. His intention ofilling Napoleon and his calculations of the cabalistic number ofhe beast of the Apocalypse now seemed to him meaningless and evenidiculous. His anger with his wife and anxiety that his name shouldot be smirched now seemed not merely trivial but even amusing. Whatoncern was it of his that somewhere or other that woman was leadinghe life she preferred? What did it matter to anybody, andspecially to him, whether or not they found out that their prisoner'same was Count Bezukhov?
	He now often remembered his conversation with Prince Andrew anduite agreed with him, though he understood Prince Andrew's thoughtsomewhat differently. Prince Andrew had thought and said thatappiness could only be negative, but had said it with a shade ofitterness and irony as though he was really saying that all desireor positive happiness is implanted in us merely to torment us andever be satisfied. But Pierre believed it without any mentaleservation. The absence of suffering, the satisfaction of one's needsnd consequent freedom in the choice of one's occupation, that is,f one's way of life, now seemed to Pierre to be indubitably man'sighest happiness. Here and now for the first time he fullyppreciated the enjoyment of eating when he wanted to eat, drinkinghen he wanted to drink, sleeping when he wanted to sleep, of warmthhen he was cold, of talking to a fellow man when he wished to talknd to hear a human voice. The satisfaction of one's needs- good food,leanliness, and freedom- now that he was deprived of all this, seemedo Pierre to constitute perfect happiness; and the choice ofccupation, that is, of his way of life- now that that was soestricted- seemed to him such an easy matter that he forgot that auperfluity of the comforts of life destroys all joy in satisfyingne's needs, while great freedom in the choice of occupation- suchreedom as his wealth, his education, and his social position hadiven him in his own life- is just what makes the choice of occupationnsolubly difficult and destroys the desire and possibility ofaving an occupation.
	All Pierre's daydreams now turned on the time when he would be free.et subsequently, and for the rest of his life, he thought and spokeith enthusiasm of that month of captivity, of those irrecoverable,trong, joyful sensations, and chiefly of the complete peace of mindnd inner freedom which he experienced only during those weeks.
	When on the first day he got up early, went out of the shed at dawn,nd saw the cupolas and crosses of the New Convent of the Virgin stillark at first, the hoarfrost on the dusty grass, the Sparrow Hills,nd the wooded banks above the winding river vanishing in the purpleistance, when he felt the contact of the fresh air and heard theoise of the crows flying from Moscow across the field, and whenfterwards light gleamed from the east and the sun's rim appearedolemnly from behind a cloud, and the cupolas and crosses, theoarfrost, the distance and the river, all began to sparkle in thelad light- Pierre felt a new joy and strength in life such as head never before known. And this not only stayed with him during thehole of his imprisonment, but even grew in strength as theardships of his position increased.
	That feeling of alertness and of readiness for anything was stillurther strengthened in him by the high opinion his fellow prisonersormed of him soon after his arrival at the shed. With his knowledgef languages, the respect shown him by the French, his simplicity, hiseadiness to give anything asked of him (he received the allowancef three rubles a week made to officers); with his strength, whiche showed to the soldiers by pressing nails into the walls of the hut;is gentleness to his companions, and his capacity for sitting stillnd thinking without doing anything (which seemed to themncomprehensible), he appeared to them a rather mysterious anduperior being. The very qualities that had been a hindrance, if notctually harmful, to him in the world he had lived in- his strength,is disdain for the comforts of life, his absent-mindedness andimplicity- here among these people gave him almost the status of aero. And Pierre felt that their opinion placed responsibilitiespon him.BK13|CH13
	CHAPTER XIII
	The French evacuation began on the night between the sixth andeventh of October: kitchens and sheds were dismantled, cartsoaded, and troops and baggage trains started.
	At seven in the morning a French convoy in marching trim, wearinghakos and carrying muskets, knapsacks, and enormous sacks, stood inront of the sheds, and animated French talk mingled with cursesounded all along the lines.
	In the shed everyone was ready, dressed, belted, shod, and onlywaited the order to start. The sick soldier, Sokolov, pale and thinith dark shadows round his eyes, alone sat in his place barefootnd not dressed. His eyes, prominent from the emaciation of hisace, gazed inquiringly at his comrades who were paying no attentiono him, and he moaned regularly and quietly. It was evidently not souch his sufferings that caused him to moan (he had dysentery) asis fear and grief at being left alone.
	Pierre, girt with a rope round his waist and wearing shoesarataev had made for him from some leather a French soldier hadorn off a tea chest and brought to have his boots mended with, wentp to the sick man and squatted down beside him.
	"You know, Sokolov, they are not all going away! They have aospital here. You may be better off than we others," said Pierre.
	"O Lord! Oh, it will be the death of me! O Lord!" moaned the mann a louder voice.
	"I'll go and ask them again directly," said Pierre, rising and goingo the door of the shed.
	Just as Pierre reached the door, the corporal who had offered him pipe the day before came up to it with two soldiers. The corporalnd soldiers were in marching kit with knapsacks and shakos that hadetal straps, and these changed their familiar faces.
	The corporal came, according to orders, to shut the door. Therisoners had to be counted before being let out.
	"Corporal, what will they do with the sick man?..." Pierre began.
	But even as he spoke he began to doubt whether this was the corporale knew or a stranger, so unlike himself did the corporal seem at thatoment. Moreover, just as Pierre was speaking a sharp rattle ofrums was suddenly heard from both sides. The corporal frowned atierre's words and, uttering some meaningless oaths, slammed the door.he shed became semidark, and the sharp rattle of the drums on twoides drowned the sick man's groans.
	"There it is!... It again!..." said Pierre to himself, and annvoluntary shudder ran down his spine. In the corporal's changedace, in the sound of his voice, in the stirring and deafening noisef the drums, he recognized that mysterious, callous force whichompelled people against their will to kill their fellow men- thatorce the effect of which he had witnessed during the executions. Toear or to try to escape that force, to address entreaties orxhortations to those who served as its tools, was useless. Pierrenew this now. One had to wait and endure. He did not again go tohe sick man, nor turn to look at him, but stood frowning by theoor of the hut.
	When that door was opened and the prisoners, crowding against onenother like a flock of sheep, squeezed into the exit, Pierre pushedis way forward and approached that very captain who as the corporalad assured him was ready to do anything for him. The captain was alson marching kit, and on his cold face appeared that same it whichierre had recognized in the corporal's words and in the roll of therums.
	"Pass on, pass on!" the captain reiterated, frowning sternly, andooking at the prisoners who thronged past him.
	Pierre went up to him, though he knew his attempt would be vain.
	"What now?" the officer asked with a cold look as if not recognizingierre.
	Pierre told him about the sick man.
	"He'll manage to walk, devil take him!" said the captain. "Passn, pass on!" he continued without looking at Pierre.
	"But he is dying," Pierre again began.
	"Be so good..." shouted the captain, frowning angrily.
	"Dram-da-da-dam, dam-dam..." rattled the drums, and Pierrenderstood that this mysterious force completely controlled theseen and that it was now useless to say any more.
	The officer prisoners were separated from the soldiers and told toarch in front. There were about thirty officers, with Pierre amonghem, and about three hundred men.
	The officers, who had come from the other sheds, were alltrangers to Pierre and much better dressed than he. They looked atim and at his shoes mistrustfully, as at an alien. Not far from himalked a fat major with a sallow, bloated, angry face, who was wearing Kazan dressing grown tied round with a towel, and who evidentlynjoyed the respect of his fellow prisoners. He kept one hand, inhich he clasped his tobacco pouch, inside the bosom of his dressingown and held the stem of his pipe firmly with the other. Pantingnd puffing, the major grumbled and growled at everybody because hehought he was being pushed and that they were all hurrying whenhey had nowhere to hurry to and were all surprised at somethinghen there was nothing to be surprised at. Another, a thin littlefficer, was speaking to everyone, conjecturing where they were noweing taken and how far they would get that day. An official in feltoots and wearing a commissariat uniform ran round from side to sidend gazed at the ruins of Moscow, loudly announcing his observationss to what had been burned down and what this or that part of the cityas that they could see. A third officer, who by his accent was aole, disputed with the commissariat officer, arguing that he wasistaken in his identification of the different wards of Moscow.
	"What are you disputing about?" said the major angrily. "What doest matter whether it is St. Nicholas or St. Blasius? You see it'surned down, and there's an end of it.... What are you pushing for?sn't the road wide enough?" said he, turning to a man behind himho was not pushing him at all.
	"Oh, oh, oh! What have they done?" the prisoners on one side andnother were heard saying as they gazed on the charred ruins. "Alleyond the river, and Zubova, and in the Kremlin.... Just look!here's not half of it left. Yes, I told you- the whole quarter beyondhe river, and so it is."
	"Well, you know it's burned, so what's the use of talking?" said theajor.
	As they passed near a church in the Khamovniki (one of the fewnburned quarters of Moscow) the whole mass of prisoners suddenlytarted to one side and exclamations of horror and disgust were heard.
	"Ah, the villains! What heathens! Yes; dead, dead, so he is... Andmeared with something!"
	Pierre too drew near the church where the thing was that evokedhese exclamations, and dimly made out something leaning against thealings surrounding the church. From the words of his comrades who sawetter than he did, he found that this was the body of a man, setpright against the palings with its face smeared with soot.
	"Go on! What the devil... Go on! Thirty thousand devils!..." theonvoy guards began cursing and the French soldiers, with freshirulence, drove away with their swords the crowd of prisoners whoere gazing at the dead man.BK13|CH14
	CHAPTER XIV
	Through the cross streets of the Khamovniki quarter the prisonersarched, followed only by their escort and the vehicles and wagonselonging to that escort, but when they reached the supply stores theyame among a huge and closely packed train of artillery mingled withrivate vehicles.
	At the bridge they all halted, waiting for those in front to getcross. From the bridge they had a view of endless lines of movingaggage trains before and behind them. To the right, where thealuga road turns near Neskuchny, endless rows of troops and cartstretched away into the distance. These were troops of Beauharnais'orps which had started before any of the others. Behind, along theiverside and across the Stone Bridge, were Ney's troops andransport.
	Davout's troops, in whose charge were the prisoners, were crossinghe Crimean bridge and some were already debouching into the Kalugaoad. But the baggage trains stretched out so that the last ofeauharnais' train had not yet got out of Moscow and reached thealuga road when the vanguard of Ney's army was already emergingrom the Great Ordynka Street.
	When they had crossed the Crimean bridge the prisoners moved a fewteps forward, halted, and again moved on, and from all sides vehiclesnd men crowded closer and closer together. They advanced the fewundred paces that separated the bridge from the Kaluga road, takingore than an hour to do so, and came out upon the square where thetreets of the Transmoskva ward and the Kaluga road converge, andhe prisoners jammed close together had to stand for some hours athat crossway. From all sides, like the roar of the sea, were heardhe rattle of wheels, the tramp of feet, and incessant shouts of angernd abuse. Pierre stood pressed against the wall of a charred house,istening to that noise which mingled in his imagination with the rollf the drums.
	To get a better view, several officer prisoners climbed onto theall of the half-burned house against which Pierre was leaning.
	"What crowds! Just look at the crowds!... They've loaded goodsven on the cannon! Look there, those are furs!" they exclaimed. "Justee what the blackguards have looted.... There! See what that oneas behind in the cart.... Why, those are settings taken from somecons, by heaven!... Oh, the rascals!... See how that fellow hasoaded himself up, he can hardly walk! Good lord, they've even grabbedhose chaises!... See that fellow there sitting on the trunks....eavens! They're fighting."
	"That's right, hit him on the snout- on his snout! Like this, wehan't get away before evening. Look, look there.... Why, that must beapoleon's own. See what horses! And the monograms with a crown!t's like a portable house.... That fellow's dropped his sack andoesn't see it. Fighting again... A woman with a baby, and notad-looking either! Yes, I dare say, that's the way they'll let youass... Just look, there's no end to it. Russian wenches, by heaven,o they are! In carriages- see how comfortably they've settledhemselves!"
	Again, as at the church in Khamovniki, a wave of general curiosityore all the prisoners forward onto the road, and Pierre, thanks tois stature, saw over the heads of the others what so attractedheir curiosity. In three carriages involved among the munition carts,losely squeezed together, sat women with rouged faces, dressed inlaring colors, who were shouting something in shrill voices.
	From the moment Pierre had recognized the appearance of theysterious force nothing had seemed to him strange or dreadful:either the corpse smeared with soot for fun nor these womenurrying away nor the burned ruins of Moscow. All that he nowitnessed scarcely made an impression on him- as if his soul, makingeady for a hard struggle, refused to receive impressions that mighteaken it.
	The women's vehicles drove by. Behind them came more carts,oldiers, wagons, soldiers, gun carriages, carriages, soldiers,mmunition carts, more soldiers, and now and then women.
	Pierre did not see the people as individuals but saw their movement.
	All these people and horses seemed driven forward by somenvisible power. During the hour Pierre watched them they all camelowing from the different streets with one and the same desire to getn quickly; they all jostled one another, began to grow angry and toight, white teeth gleamed, brows frowned, ever the same words ofbuse flew from side to side, and all the faces bore the samewaggeringly resolute and coldly cruel expression that had struckierre that morning on the corporal's face when the drums wereeating.
	It was not till nearly evening that the officer commanding thescort collected his men and with shouts and quarrels forced his wayn among the baggage trains, and the prisoners, hemmed in on allides, emerged onto the Kaluga road.
	They marched very quickly, without resting, and halted only when theun began to set. The baggage carts drew up close together and the menegan to prepare for their night's rest. They all appeared angry andissatisfied. For a long time, oaths, angry shouts, and fighting coulde heard from all sides. A carriage that followed the escort rannto one of the carts and knocked a hole in it with its pole.everal soldiers ran toward the cart from different sides: some beathe carriage horses on their heads, turning them aside, othersought among themselves, and Pierre saw that one German was badlyounded on the head by a sword.
	It seemed that all these men, now that they had stopped amidields in the chill dusk of the autumn evening, experienced one andhe same feeling of unpleasant awakening from the hurry andagerness to push on that had seized them at the start. Once at atandstill they all seemed to understand that they did not yet knowhere they were going, and that much that was painful and difficultwaited them on this journey.
	During this halt the escort treated the prisoners even worse thanhey had done at the start. It was here that the prisoners for theirst time received horseflesh for their meat ration.
	From the officer down to the lowest soldier they showed whateemed like personal spite against each of the prisoners, innexpected contrast to their former friendly relations.
	This spite increased still more when, on calling over the roll ofrisoners, it was found that in the bustle of leaving Moscow oneussian soldier, who had pretended to suffer from colic, hadscaped. Pierre saw a Frenchman beat a Russian soldier cruelly fortraying too far from the road, and heard his friend the captaineprimand and threaten to court-martial a noncommissioned officer onccount of the escape of the Russian. To the noncommissioned officer'sxcuse that the prisoner was ill and could not walk, the officereplied that the order was to shoot those who lagged behind. Pierreelt that that fatal force which had crushed him during thexecutions, but which be had not felt during his imprisonment, nowgain controlled his existence. It was terrible, but he felt that inroportion to the efforts of that fatal force to crush him, there grewnd strengthened in his soul a power of life independent of it.
	He ate his supper of buckwheat soup with horseflesh and chatted withis comrades.
	Neither Pierre nor any of the others spoke of what they had seenn Moscow, or of the roughness of their treatment by the French, or ofhe order to shoot them which had been announced to them. As if ineaction against the worsening of their position they were allarticularly animated and gay. They spoke of personal reminiscences,f amusing scenes they had witnessed during the campaign, andvoided all talk of their present situation.
	The sun had set long since. Bright stars shone out here and there inhe sky. A red glow as of a conflagration spread above the horizonrom the rising full moon, and that vast red ball swayed strangelyn the gray haze. It grew light. The evening was ending, but the nightad not yet come. Pierre got up and left his new companions,rossing between the campfires to the other side of the road wheree had been told the common soldier prisoners were stationed. Heanted to talk to them. On the road he was stopped by a Frenchentinel who ordered him back.
	Pierre turned back, not to his companions by the campfire, but to annharnessed cart where there was nobody. Tucking his legs under himnd dropping his head he sat down on the cold ground by the wheel ofhe cart and remained motionless a long while sunk in thought.uddenly he burst out into a fit of his broad, good-naturedaughter, so loud that men from various sides turned with surpriseo see what this strange and evidently solitary laughter could mean.
	"Ha-ha-ha!" laughed Pierre. And he said aloud to himself: "Theoldier did not let me pass. They took me and shut me up. They hold meaptive. What, me? Me? My immortal soul? Ha-ha-ha! Ha-ha-ha!..." ande laughed till tears started to his eyes.
	A man got up and came to see what this queer big fellow was laughingt all by himself. Pierre stopped laughing, got up, went fartherway from the inquisitive man, and looked around him.
	The huge, endless bivouac that had previously resounded with therackling of campfires and the voices of many men had grown quiet, theed campfires were growing paler and dying down. High up in theight sky hung the full moon. Forests and fields beyond the camp,nseen before, were now visible in the distance. And farther still,eyond those forests and fields, the bright, oscillating, limitlessistance lured one to itself. Pierre glanced up at the sky and thewinkling stars in its faraway depths. "And all that is me, all thats within me, and it is all I!" thought Pierre. "And they caught allhat and put it into a shed boarded up with planks!" He smiled, andent and lay down to sleep beside his companions.BK13|CH15
	CHAPTER XV
	In the early days of October another envoy came to Kutuzov with aetter from Napoleon proposing peace and falsely dated from Moscow,hough Napoleon was already not far from Kutuzov on the old Kalugaoad. Kutuzov replied to this letter as he had done to the oneormerly brought by Lauriston, saying that there could be nouestion of peace.
	Soon after that a report was received from Dorokhov's guerrillaetachment operating to the left of Tarutino that troops ofroussier's division had been seen at Forminsk and that beingeparated from the rest of the French army they might easily beestroyed. The soldiers and officers again demanded action. Generalsn the staff, excited by the memory of the easy victory at Tarutino,rged Kutuzov to carry out Dorokhov's suggestion. Kutuzov did notonsider any offensive necessary. The result was a compromise whichas inevitable: a small detachment was sent to Forminsk to attackroussier.
	By a strange coincidence, this task, which turned out to be a mostifficult and important one, was entrusted to Dokhturov- that sameodest little Dokhturov whom no one had described to us as drawingp plans of battles, dashing about in front of regiments, showeringrosses on batteries, and so on, and who was thought to be and waspoken of as undecided and undiscerning- but whom we find commandingherever the position was most difficult all through theusso-French wars from Austerlitz to the year 1813. At Austerlitz heemained last at the Augezd dam, rallying the regiments, saving whatas possible when all were flying and perishing and not a singleeneral was left in the rear guard. Ill with fever he went to Smolenskith twenty thousand men to defend the town against Napoleon's wholermy. In Smolensk, at the Malakhov Gate, he had hardly dozed off in paroxysm of fever before he was awakened by the bombardment of theown- and Smolensk held out all day long. At the battle of Borodino,hen Bagration was killed and nine tenths of the men of our left flankad fallen and the full force of the French artillery fire wasirected against it, the man sent there was this same irresolute andndiscerning Dokhturov- Kutuzov hastening to rectify a mistake head made by sending someone else there first. And the quiet littleokhturov rode thither, and Borodino became the greatest glory ofhe Russian army. Many heroes have been described to us in verse androse, but of Dokhturov scarcely a word has been said.
	It was Dokhturov again whom they sent to Forminsk and from thereo Malo-Yaroslavets, the place where the last battle with the Frenchas fought and where the obvious disintegration of the French armyegan; and we are told of many geniuses and heroes of that period ofhe campaign, but of Dokhturov nothing or very little is said and thatubiously. And this silence about Dokhturov is the clearestestimony to his merit.
	It is natural for a man who does not understand the workings of aachine to imagine that a shaving that has fallen into it by chancend is interfering with its action and tossing about in it is its mostmportant part. The man who does not understand the construction ofhe machine cannot conceive that the small connecting cogwheel whichevolves quietly is one of the most essential parts of the machine,nd not the shaving which merely harms and hinders the working.
	On the tenth of October when Dokhturov had gone halfway toorminsk and stopped at the village of Aristovo, preparingaithfully to execute the orders he had received, the whole Frenchrmy having, in its convulsive movement, reached Murat's positionpparently in order to give battle- suddenly without any reason turnedff to the left onto the new Kaluga road and began to enterorminsk, where only Broussier had been till then. At that timeokhturov had under his command, besides Dorokhov's detachment, thewo small guerrilla detachments of Figner and Seslavin.
	On the evening of October 11 Seslavin came to the Aristovoeadquarters with a French guardsman he had captured. The prisoneraid that the troops that had entered Forminsk that day were theanguard of the whole army, that Napoleon was there and the whole armyad left Moscow four days previously. That same evening a house serfho had come from Borovsk said he had seen an immense army enteringhe town. Some Cossacks of Dokhturov's detachment reported havingighted the French Guards marching along the road to Borovsk. From allhese reports it was evident that where they had expected to meet aingle division there was now the whole French army marching fromoscow in an unexpected direction- along the Kaluga road. Dokhturovas unwilling to undertake any action, as it was not clear to himow what he ought to do. He had been ordered to attack Forminsk. Butnly Broussier had been there at that time and now the whole Frenchrmy was there. Ermolov wished to act on his own judgment, butokhturov insisted that he must have Kutuzov's instructions. So it wasecided to send a dispatch to the staff.
	For this purpose a capable officer, Bolkhovitinov, was chosen, whoas to explain the whole affair by word of mouth, besides delivering aritten report. Toward midnight Bolkhovitinov, having received theispatch and verbal instructions, galloped off to the General Staffccompanied by a Cossack with spare horses.BK13|CH16
	CHAPTER XVI
	It was a warm, dark, autumn night. It had been raining for fourays. Having changed horses twice and galloped twenty miles in an hournd a half over a sticky, muddy road, Bolkhovitinov reached Litashevkafter one o'clock at night. Dismounting at a cottage on whose wattleence hung a signboard, GENERAL STAFF, and throwing down his reins, hentered a dark passage.
	"The general on duty, quick! It's very important!" said he toomeone who had risen and was sniffing in the dark passage.
	"He has been very unwell since the evening and this is the thirdight he has not slept," said the orderly pleadingly in a whisper.You should wake the captain first."
	"But this is very important, from General Dokhturov," saidolkhovitinov, entering the open door which he had found by feeling inhe dark.
	The orderly had gone in before him and began waking somebody.
	"Your honor, your honor! A courier."
	"What? What's that? From whom?" came a sleepy voice.
	"From Dokhturov and from Alexey Petrovich. Napoleon is at Forminsk,"aid Bolkhovitinov, unable to see in the dark who was speaking butuessing by the voice that it was not Konovnitsyn.
	The man who had wakened yawned and stretched himself.
	"I don't like waking him," he said, fumbling for something. "He isery ill. Perhaps this is only a rumor."
	"Here is the dispatch," said Bolkhovitinov. "My orders are to givet at once to the general on duty."
	"Wait a moment, I'll light a candle. You damned rascal, where do youlways hide it?" said the voice of the man who was stretching himself,o the orderly. (This was Shcherbinin, Konovnitsyn's adjutant.)I've found it, I've found it!" he added.
	The orderly was striking a light and Shcherbinin was fumbling foromething on the candlestick.
	"Oh, the nasty beasts!" said he with disgust.
	By the light of the sparks Bolkhovitinov saw Shcherbinin'southful face as he held the candle, and the face of another man whoas still asleep. This was Konovnitsyn.
	When the flame of the sulphur splinters kindled by the tinder burnedp, first blue and then red, Shcherbinin lit the tallow candle, fromhe candlestick of which the cockroaches that had been gnawing it wereunning away, and looked at the messenger. Bolkhovitinov wasespattered all over with mud and had smeared his face by wiping itith his sleeve.
	"Who gave the report?" inquired Shcherbinin, taking the envelope.
	"The news is reliable," said Bolkhovitinov. "Prisoners, Cossacks,nd the scouts all say the same thing."
	"There's nothing to be done, we'll have to wake him," saidhcherbinin, rising and going up to the man in the nightcap who layovered by a greatcoat. "Peter Petrovich!" said he. (Konovnitsyn didot stir.) "To the General Staff!" he said with a smile, knowinghat those words would be sure to arouse him.
	And in fact the head in the nightcap was lifted at once. Ononovnitsyn's handsome, resolute face with cheeks flushed by fever,here still remained for an instant a faraway dreamy expression remoterom present affairs, but then he suddenly started and his facessumed its habitual calm and firm appearance.
	"Well, what is it? From whom?" he asked immediately but withouturry, blinking at the light.
	While listening to the officer's report Konovnitsyn broke the sealnd read the dispatch. Hardly had he done so before he lowered hisegs in their woolen stockings to the earthen floor and beganutting on his boots. Then he took off his nightcap, combed his hairver his temples, and donned his cap.
	"Did you get here quickly? Let us go to his Highness."
	Konovnitsyn had understood at once that the news brought was ofreat importance and that no time must be lost. He did not consider orsk himself whether the news was good or bad. That did not interestim. He regarded the whole business of the war not with hisntelligence or his reason but by something else. There was within him deep unexpressed conviction that all would be well, but that oneust not trust to this and still less speak about it, but must onlyttend to one's own work. And he did his work, giving his wholetrength to the task.
	Peter Petrovich Konovnitsyn, like Dokhturov, seems to have beenncluded merely for propriety's sake in the list of the so-callederoes of 1812- the Barclays, Raevskis, Ermolovs, Platovs, andiloradoviches. Like Dokhturov he had the reputation of being a man ofery limited capacity and information, and like Dokhturov he neverade plans of battle but was always found where the situation was mostifficult. Since his appointment as general on duty he had alwayslept with his door open, giving orders that every messenger should bellowed to wake him up. In battle he was always under fire, so thatutuzov reproved him for it and feared to send him to the front, andike Dokhturov he was one of those unnoticed cogwheels that, withoutlatter or noise, constitute the most essential part of the machine.
	Coming out of the hut into the damp, dark night Konovnitsyn frowned-artly from an increased pain in his head and partly at the unpleasanthought that occurred to him, of how all that nest of influentialen on the staff would be stirred up by this news, especiallyennigsen, who ever since Tarutino had been at daggers drawn withutuzov; and how they would make suggestions, quarrel, issue orders,nd rescind them. And this premonition was disagreeable to himhough he knew it could not be helped.
	And in fact Toll, to whom he went to communicate the news,mmediately began to expound his plans to a general sharing hisuarters, until Konovnitsyn, who listened in weary silence, remindedim that they must go to see his Highness.BK13|CH17
	CHAPTER XVII
	Kutuzov like all old people did not sleep much at night. He oftenell asleep unexpectedly in the daytime, but at night, lying on hised without undressing, he generally remained awake thinking.
	So he lay now on his bed, supporting his large, heavy, scarredead on his plump hand, with his one eye open, meditating andeering into the darkness.
	Since Bennigsen, who corresponded with the Emperor and had morenfluence than anyone else on the staff, had begun to avoid him,utuzov was more at ease as to the possibility of himself and hisroops being obliged to take part in useless aggressive movements. Theesson of the Tarutino battle and of the day before it, whichutuzov remembered with pain, must, he thought, have some effect onthers too.
	"They must understand that we can only lose by taking the offensive.atience and time are my warriors, my champions," thought Kutuzov.e knew that an apple should not be plucked while it is green. It willall of itself when ripe, but if picked unripe the apple is spoiled,he tree is harmed, and your teeth are set on edge. Like anxperienced sportsman he knew that the beast was wounded, andounded as only the whole strength of Russia could have wounded it,ut whether it was mortally wounded or not was still an undecideduestion. Now by the fact of Lauriston and Barthelemi having beenent, and by the reports of the guerrillas, Kutuzov was almost surehat the wound was mortal. But he needed further proofs and it wasecessary to wait.
	"They want to run to see how they have wounded it. Wait and we shallee! Continual maneuvers, continual advances!" thought he. "Whator? Only to distinguish themselves! As if fighting were fun. They areike children from whom one can't get any sensible account of what hasappened because they all want to show how well they can fight. Buthat's not what is needed now.
	"And what ingenious maneuvers they all propose to me! It seems tohem that when they have thought of two or three contingencies" (heemembered the general plan sent him from Petersburg) "they haveoreseen everything. But the contingencies are endless."
	The undecided question as to whether the wound inflicted at Borodinoas mortal or not had hung over Kutuzov's head for a whole month. Onhe one hand the French had occupied Moscow. On the other Kutuzov feltssured with all his being that the terrible blow into which he andll the Russians had put their whole strength must have been mortal.ut in any case proofs were needed; he had waited a whole month forhem and grew more impatient the longer he waited. Lying on his beduring those sleepless nights he did just what he reproached thoseounger generals for doing. He imagined all sorts of possibleontingencies, just like the younger men, but with this difference,hat he saw thousands of contingencies instead of two or three andased nothing on them. The longer he thought the more contingenciesresented themselves. He imagined all sorts of movements of theapoleonic army as a whole or in sections- against Petersburg, orgainst him, or to outflank him. He thought too of the possibilitywhich he feared most of all) that Napoleon might fight him with hiswn weapon and remain in Moscow awaiting him. Kutuzov even imaginedhat Napoleon's army might turn back through Medyn and Yukhnov, buthe one thing he could not foresee was what happened- the insane,onvulsive stampede of Napoleon's army during its first eleven daysfter leaving Moscow: a stampede which made possible what Kutuzovad not yet even dared to think of- the complete extermination ofhe French. Dorokhov's report about Broussier's division, theuerrillas' reports of distress in Napoleon's army, rumors ofreparations for leaving Moscow, all confirmed the supposition thathe French army was beaten and preparing for flight. But these werenly suppositions, which seemed important to the younger men but noto Kutuzov. With his sixty years' experience he knew what value tottach to rumors, knew how apt people who desire anything are to groupll news so that it appears to confirm what they desire, and he knewow readily in such cases they omit all that makes for the contrary.nd the more he desired it the less he allowed himself to believet. This question absorbed all his mental powers. All else was toim only life's customary routine. To such customary routineelonged his conversations with the staff, the letters he wrote fromarutino to Madame de Stael, the reading of novels, the distributionf awards, his correspondence with Petersburg, and so on. But theestruction of the French, which he alone foresaw, was his heart's oneesire.
	On the night of the eleventh of October he lay leaning on his armnd thinking of that.
	There was a stir in the next room and he heard the steps of Toll,onovnitsyn, and Bolkhovitinov.
	"Eh, who's there? Come in, come in! What news?" the field marshalalled out to them.
	While a footman was lighting a candle, Toll communicated theubstance of the news.
	"Who brought it?" asked Kutuzov with a look which, when the candleas lit, struck Toll by its cold severity.
	"There can be no doubt about it, your Highness."
	"Call him in, call him here."
	Kutuzov sat up with one leg hanging down from the bed and his bigaunch resting against the other which was doubled under him. Hecrewed up his seeing eye to scrutinize the messenger morearefully, as if wishing to read in his face what preoccupied hiswn mind.
	"Tell me, tell me, friend," said he to Bolkhovitinov in his low,ged voice, as he pulled together the shirt which gaped open on hishest, "come nearer- nearer. What news have you brought me? Eh? Thatapoleon has left Moscow? Are you sure? Eh?"
	Bolkhovitinov gave a detailed account from the beginning of all head been told to report.
	"Speak quicker, quicker! Don't torture me!" Kutuzov interrupted him.
	Bolkhovitinov told him everything and was then silent, awaitingnstructions. Toll was beginning to say something but Kutuzovhecked him. He tried to say something, but his face suddenly puckerednd wrinkled; he waved his arm at Toll and turned to the opposite sidef the room, to the corner darkened by the icons that hung there.
	"O Lord, my Creator, Thou has heard our prayer..." said he in aremulous voice with folded hands. "Russia is saved. I thank Thee, Oord!" and he wept.BK13|CH18
	CHAPTER XVIII
	From the time he received this news to the end of the campaign allutuzov's activity was directed toward restraining his troops, byuthority, by guile, and by entreaty, from useless attacks, maneuvers,r encounters with the perishing enemy. Dokhturov went toalo-Yaroslavets, but Kutuzov lingered with the main army and gaverders for the evacuation of Kaluga- a retreat beyond which towneemed to him quite possible.
	Everywhere Kutuzov retreated, but the enemy without waiting foris retreat fled in the opposite direction.
	Napoleon's historians describe to us his skilled maneuvers atarutino and Malo-Yaroslavets, and make conjectures as to what wouldave happened had Napoleon been in time to penetrate into the richouthern provinces.
	But not to speak of the fact that nothing prevented him fromdvancing into those southern provinces (for the Russian army didot bar his way), the historians forget that nothing could haveaved his army, for then already it bore within itself the germs ofnevitable ruin. How could that army- which had found abundantupplies in Moscow and had trampled them underfoot instead ofeeping them, and on arriving at Smolensk had looted provisionsnstead of storing them- how could that army recuperate in Kalugarovince, which was inhabited by Russians such as those who lived inoscow, and where fire had the same property of consuming what was setblaze?
	That army could not recover anywhere. Since the battle of Borodinond the pillage of Moscow it had borne within itself, as it were,he chemical elements of dissolution.
	The members of what had once been an army- Napoleon himself andll his soldiers fled- without knowing whither, each concerned only toake his escape as quickly as possible from this position, of theopelessness of which they were all more or less vaguely conscious.
	So it came about that at the council at Malo-Yaroslavets, when theenerals pretending to confer together expressed various opinions, allouths were closed by the opinion uttered by the simple-minded soldierouton who, speaking last, said what they all felt: that the one thingeedful was to get away as quickly as possible; and no one, not evenapoleon, could say anything against that truth which they allecognized.
	But though they all realized that it was necessary to get away,here still remained a feeling of shame at admitting that they mustlee. An external shock was needed to overcome that shame, and thishock came in due time. It was what the French called "le hourra de'Empereur."
	The day after the council at Malo-Yaroslavets Napoleon rode outarly in the morning amid the lines of his army with his suite ofarshals and an escort, on the pretext of inspecting the army andhe scene of the previous and of the impending battle. Some Cossacksn the prowl for booty fell in with the Emperor and very nearlyaptured him. If the Cossacks did not capture Napoleon then, whataved him was the very thing that was destroying the French army,he booty on which the Cossacks fell. Here as at Tarutino they wentfter plunder, leaving the men. Disregarding Napoleon they rushedfter the plunder and Napoleon managed to escape.
	When les enfants du Don might so easily have taken the Emperorimself in the midst of his army, it was clear that there wasothing for it but to fly as fast as possible along the nearest,amiliar road. Napoleon with his forty-year-old stomach understoodhat hint, not feeling his former agility and boldness, and underhe influence of the fright the Cossacks had given him he at oncegreed with Mouton and issued orders- as the historians tell us- toetreat by the Smolensk road.
	That Napoleon agreed with Mouton, and that the army retreated,oes not prove that Napoleon caused it to retreat, but that the forceshich influenced the whole army and directed it along the Mozhayskthat is, the Smolensk) road acted simultaneously on him also.BK13|CH19
	CHAPTER XIX
	A man in motion always devises an aim for that motion. To be able too a thousand miles he must imagine that something good awaits himt the end of those thousand miles. One must have the prospect of aromised land to have the strength to move.
	The promised land for the French during their advance had beenoscow, during their retreat it was their native land. But that nativeand was too far off, and for a man going a thousand miles it isbsolutely necessary to set aside his final goal and to say toimself: "Today I shall get to a place twenty-five miles off where Ihall rest and spend the night," and during the first day's journeyhat resting place eclipses his ultimate goal and attracts all hisopes and desires. And the impulses felt by a single person are alwaysagnified in a crowd.
	For the French retreating along the old Smolensk road, the finaloal- their native land- was too remote, and their immediate goalas Smolensk, toward which all their desires and hopes, enormouslyntensified in the mass, urged them on. It was not that they knew thatuch food and fresh troops awaited them in Smolensk, nor that theyere told so (on the contrary their superior officers, and Napoleonimself, knew that provisions were scarce there), but because thislone could give them strength to move on and endure their presentrivations. So both those who knew and those who did not know deceivedhemselves, and pushed on to Smolensk as to a promised land.
	Coming out onto the highroad the French fled with surprisingnergy and unheard-of rapidity toward the goal they had fixed on.esides the common impulse which bound the whole crowd of Frenchnto one mass and supplied them with a certain energy, there wasnother cause binding them together- their great numbers. As withhe physical law of gravity, their enormous mass drew the individualuman atoms to itself. In their hundreds of thousands they movedike a whole nation.
	Each of them desired nothing more than to give himself up as arisoner to escape from all this horror and misery; but on the oneand the force of this common attraction to Smolensk, their goal, drewach of them in the same direction; on the other hand an army corpsould not surrender to a company, and though the French availedhemselves of every convenient opportunity to detach themselves and tourrender on the slightest decent pretext, such pretexts did notlways occur. Their very numbers and their crowded and swiftovement deprived them of that possibility and rendered it not onlyifficult but impossible for the Russians to stop this movement, tohich the French were directing all their energies. Beyond a certainimit no mechanical disruption of the body could hasten the process ofecomposition.
	A lump of snow cannot be melted instantaneously. There is aertain limit of time in less than which no amount of heat can melthe snow. On the contrary the greater the heat the more solidified theemaining snow becomes.
	Of the Russian commanders Kutuzov alone understood this. When thelight of the French army along the Smolensk road became well defined,hat Konovnitsyn had foreseen on the night of the eleventh ofctober began to occur. The superior officers all wanted toistinguish themselves, to cut off, to seize, to capture, and toverthrow the French, and all clamored for action.
	Kutuzov alone used all his power (and such power is very limitedn the case of any commander in chief) to prevent an attack.
	He could not tell them what we say now: "Why fight, why block theoad, losing our own men and inhumanly slaughtering unfortunateretches? What is the use of that, when a third of their army haselted away on the road from Moscow to Vyazma without any battle?" Butrawing from his aged wisdom what they could understand, he toldhem of the golden bridge, and they laughed at and slandered him,linging themselves on, rending and exulting over the dying beast.
	Ermolov, Miloradovich, Platov, and others in proximity to the Frenchear Vyazma could not resist their desire to cut off and break upwo French corps, and by way of reporting their intention to Kutuzovhey sent him a blank sheet of paper in an envelope.
	And try as Kutuzov might to restrain the troops, our men attacked,rying to bar the road. Infantry regiments, we are told, advanced tohe attack with music and with drums beating, and killed and losthousands of men.
	But they did not cut off or overthrow anybody and the French army,losing up more firmly at the danger, continued, while steadilyelting away, to pursue its fatal path to Smolensk.BK14	                            BOOK FOURTEEN: 1812BK14|CH1
	CHAPTER I
	The Battle of Borodino, with the occupation of Moscow thatollowed it and the flight of the French without further conflicts, isne of the most instructive phenomena in history.
	All historians agree that the external activity of states andations in their conflicts with one another is expressed in wars,nd that as a direct result of greater or less success in war theolitical strength of states and nations increases or decreases.
	Strange as may be the historical account of how some king ormperor, having quarreled with another, collects an army, fights hisnemy's army, gains a victory by killing three, five, or tenhousand men, and subjugates a kingdom and an entire nation of severalillions, all the facts of history (as far as we know it) confirmhe truth of the statement that the greater or lesser success of onermy against another is the cause, or at least an essentialndication, of an increase or decrease in the strength of theation- even though it is unintelligible why the defeat of an army- hundredth part of a nation- should oblige that whole nation toubmit. An army gains a victory, and at once the rights of theonquering nation have increased to the detriment of the defeated.n army has suffered defeat, and at once a people loses its rightsn proportion to the severity of the reverse, and if its armyuffers a complete defeat the nation is quite subjugated.
	So according to history it has been found from the most ancientimes, and so it is to our own day. All Napoleon's wars serve toonfirm this rule. In proportion to the defeat of the Austrian armyustria loses its rights, and the rights and the strength of Francencrease. The victories of the French at Jena and Auerstadt destroyhe independent existence of Prussia.
	But then, in 1812, the French gain a victory near Moscow. Moscows taken and after that, with no further battles, it is not Russiahat ceases to exist, but the French army of six hundred thousand, andhen Napoleonic France itself. To strain the facts to fit the rules ofistory: to say that the field of battle at Borodino remained in theands of the Russians, or that after Moscow there were other battleshat destroyed Napoleon's army, is impossible.
	After the French victory at Borodino there was no general engagementor any that were at all serious, yet the French army ceased to exist.hat does this mean? If it were an example taken from the history ofhina, we might say that it was not an historic phenomenon (which ishe historians' usual expedient when anything does not fit theirtandards); if the matter concerned some brief conflict in whichnly a small number of troops took part, we might treat it as anxception; but this event occurred before our fathers' eyes, and forhem it was a question of the life or death of their fatherland, andt happened in the greatest of all known wars.
	The period of the campaign of 1812 from the battle of Borodino tohe expulsion of the French proved that the winning of a battle doesot produce a conquest and is not even an invariable indication ofonquest; it proved that the force which decides the fate of peoplesies not in the conquerors, nor even in armies and battles, but inomething else.
	The French historians, describing the condition of the French armyefore it left Moscow, affirm that all was in order in the Grand Army,xcept the cavalry, the artillery, and the transport- there was noorage for the horses or the cattle. That was a misfortune no oneould remedy, for the peasants of the district burned their hay ratherhan let the French have it.
	The victory gained did not bring the usual results because theeasants Karp and Vlas (who after the French had evacuated Moscowrove in their carts to pillage the town, and in general personallyailed to manifest any heroic feelings), and the whole innumerableultitude of such peasants, did not bring their hay to Moscow forhe high price offered them, but burned it instead.
	Let us imagine two men who have come out to fight a duel withapiers according to all the rules of the art of fencing. Theencing has gone on for some time; suddenly one of the combatants,eeling himself wounded and understanding that the matter is no jokeut concerns his life, throws down his rapier, and seizing the firstudgel that comes to hand begins to brandish it. Then let us imaginehat the combatant who so sensibly employed the best and simplesteans to attain his end was at the same time influenced byraditions of chivalry and, desiring to conceal the facts of the case,nsisted that he had gained his victory with the rapier according toll the rules of art. One can imagine what confusion and obscurityould result from such an account of the duel.
	The fencer who demanded a contest according to the rules ofencing was the French army; his opponent who threw away the rapiernd snatched up the cudgel was the Russian people; those who try toxplain the matter according to the rules of fencing are theistorians who have described the event.
	After the burning of Smolensk a war began which did not follow anyrevious traditions of war. The burning of towns and villages, theetreats after battles, the blow dealt at Borodino and the renewedetreat, the burning of Moscow, the capture of marauders, theeizure of transports, and the guerrilla war were all departuresrom the rules.
	Napoleon felt this, and from the time he took up the correct fencingttitude in Moscow and instead of his opponent's rapier saw a cudgelaised above his head, he did not cease to complain to Kutuzov ando the Emperor Alexander that the war was being carried on contrary toll the rules- as if there were any rules for killing people. In spitef the complaints of the French as to the nonobservance of theules, in spite of the fact that to some highly placed Russians iteemed rather disgraceful to fight with a cudgel and they wanted tossume a pose en quarte or en tierce according to all the rules, ando make an adroit thrust en prime, and so on- the cudgel of theeople's war was lifted with all its menacing and majestic strength,nd without consulting anyone's tastes or rules and regardless ofnything else, it rose and fell with stupid simplicity, butonsistently, and belabored the French till the whole invasion haderished.
	And it is well for a people who do not- as the French did in 1813-alute according to all the rules of art, and, presenting the hiltf their rapier gracefully and politely, hand it to theiragnanimous conqueror, but at the moment of trial, without asking whatules others have adopted in similar cases, simply and easily pickp the first cudgel that comes to hand and strike with it till theeeling of resentment and revenge in their soul yields to a feeling ofontempt and compassion.BK14|CH2
	CHAPTER II
	One of the most obvious and advantageous departures from theo-called laws of war is the action of scattered groups against menressed together in a mass. Such action always occurs in wars thatake on a national character. In such actions, instead of two crowdspposing each other, the men disperse, attack singly, run away whenttacked by stronger forces, but again attack when opportunity offers.his was done by the guerrillas in Spain, by the mountain tribes inhe Caucasus, and by the Russians in 1812.
	People have called this kind of war "guerrilla warfare" and assumehat by so calling it they have explained its meaning. But such aar does not fit in under any rule and is directly opposed to aell-known rule of tactics which is accepted as infallible. Thatule says that an attacker should concentrate his forces in order toe stronger than his opponent at the moment of conflict.
	Guerrilla war (always successful, as history shows) directlynfringes that rule.
	This contradiction arises from the fact that military sciencessumes the strength of an army to be identical with its numbers.ilitary science says that the more troops the greater the strength.es gros bataillons ont toujours raison.*
	*Large battalions are always victorious.
	For military science to say this is like defining momentum inechanics by reference to the mass only: stating that momenta arequal or unequal to each other simply because the masses involvedre equal or unequal.
	Momentum (quantity of motion) is the product of mass and velocity.
	In military affairs the strength of an army is the product of itsass and some unknown x.
	Military science, seeing in history innumerable instances of theact that the size of any army does not coincide with its strength andhat small detachments defeat larger ones, obscurely admits thexistence of this unknown factor and tries to discover it- now in aeometric formation, now in the equipment employed, now, and mostsually, in the genius of the commanders. But the assignment ofhese various meanings to the factor does not yield results whichccord with the historic facts.
	Yet it is only necessary to abandon the false view (adopted toratify the "heroes") of the efficacy of the directions issued inartime by commanders, in order to find this unknown quantity.
	That unknown quantity is the spirit of the army, that is to say, thereater or lesser readiness to fight and face danger felt by all theen composing an army, quite independently of whether they are, or areot, fighting under the command of a genius, in two- or three-lineormation, with cudgels or with rifles that repeat thirty times ainute. Men who want to fight will always put themselves in the mostdvantageous conditions for fighting.
	The spirit of an army is the factor which multiplied by the massives the resulting force. To define and express the significance ofhis unknown factor- the spirit of an army- is a problem for science.
	This problem is only solvable if we cease arbitrarily toubstitute for the unknown x itself the conditions under which thatorce becomes apparent- such as the commands of the general, thequipment employed, and so on- mistaking these for the realignificance of the factor, and if we recognize this unknownuantity in its entirety as being the greater or lesser desire toight and to face danger. Only then, expressing known historic factsy equations and comparing the relative significance of this factor,an we hope to define the unknown.
	Ten men, battalions, or divisions, fighting fifteen men, battalions,r divisions, conquer- that is, kill or take captive- all thethers, while themselves losing four, so that on the one side four andn the other fifteen were lost. Consequently the four were equal tohe fifteen, and therefore 4x = 15y. Consequently x/y = 15/4. Thisquation does not give us the value of the unknown factor but gives us ratio between two unknowns. And by bringing variously selectedistoric units (battles, campaigns, periods of war) into suchquations, a series of numbers could be obtained in which certain lawshould exist and might be discovered.
	The tactical rule that an army should act in masses whenttacking, and in smaller groups in retreat, unconsciously confirmshe truth that the strength of an army depends on its spirit. Toead men forward under fire more discipline (obtainable only byovement in masses) is needed than is needed to resist attacks. Buthis rule which leaves out of account the spirit of the armyontinually proves incorrect and is in particularly strikingontrast to the facts when some strong rise or fall in the spirit ofhe troops occurs, as in all national wars.
	The French, retreating in 1812- though according to tactics theyhould have separated into detachments to defend themselves-ongregated into a mass because the spirit of the army had so fallenhat only the mass held the army together. The Russians, on theontrary, ought according to tactics to have attacked in mass, butn fact they split up into small units, because their spirit had soisen that separate individuals, without orders, dealt blows at therench without needing any compulsion to induce them to exposehemselves to hardships and dangers.BK14|CH3
	CHAPTER III
	The so-called partisan war began with the entry of the French intomolensk.
	Before partisan warfare had been officially recognized by theovernment, thousands of enemy stragglers, marauders, and foragers hadeen destroyed by the Cossacks and the peasants, who killed them offs instinctively as dogs worry a stray mad dog to death. Denisavydov, with his Russian instinct, was the first to recognize thealue of this terrible cudgel which regardless of the rules ofilitary science destroyed the French, and to him belongs the creditor taking the first step toward regularizing this method of warfare.
	On August 24 Davydov's first partisan detachment was formed and thenthers were recognized. The further the campaign progressed the moreumerous these detachments became.
	The irregulars destroyed the great army piecemeal. They gathered theallen leaves that dropped of themselves from that withered tree-he French army- and sometimes shook that tree itself. By October,hen the French were fleeing toward Smolensk, there were hundreds ofuch companies, of various sizes and characters. There were somehat adopted all the army methods and had infantry, artillery, staffs,nd the comforts of life. Others consisted solely of Cossackavalry. There were also small scratch groups of foot and horse, androups of peasants and landowners that remained unknown. A sacristanommanded one party which captured several hundred prisoners in theourse of a month; and there was Vasilisa, the wife of a villagelder, who slew hundreds of the French.
	The partisan warfare flamed up most fiercely in the latter days ofctober. Its first period had passed: when the partisans themselves,mazed at their own boldness, feared every minute to be surrounded andaptured by the French, and hid in the forests without unsaddling,ardly daring to dismount and always expecting to be pursued. By thend of October this kind of warfare had taken definite shape: it hadecome clear to all what could be ventured against the French and whatould not. Now only the commanders of detachments with staffs, andoving according to rules at a distance from the French, stillegarded many things as impossible. The small bands that had startedheir activities long before and had already observed the Frenchlosely considered things possible which the commanders of the bigetachments did not dare to contemplate. The Cossacks and peasants whorept in among the French now considered everything possible.
	On October 22, Denisov (who was one of the irregulars) was withis group at the height of the guerrilla enthusiasm. Since earlyorning he and his party had been on the move. All day long he hadeen watching from the forest that skirted the highroad a large Frenchonvoy of cavalry baggage and Russian prisoners separated from theest of the army, which- as was learned from spies and prisoners-as moving under a strong escort to Smolensk. Besides Denisov andolokhov (who also led a small party and moved in Denisov's vicinity),he commanders of some large divisions with staffs also knew of thisonvoy and, as Denisov expressed it, were sharpening their teeth fort. Two of the commanders of large parties- one a Pole and the other aerman- sent invitations to Denisov almost simultaneously,equesting him to join up with their divisions to attack the convoy.
	"No, bwother, I have gwown mustaches myself," said Denisov oneading these documents, and he wrote to the German that, despiteis heartfelt desire to serve under so valiant and renowned a general,e had to forgo that pleasure because he was already under the commandf the Polish general. To the Polish general he replied to the sameffect, informing him that he was already under the command of theerman.
	Having arranged matters thus, Denisov and Dolokhov intended, withouteporting matters to the higher command, to attack and seize thatonvoy with their own small forces. On October 22 it was moving fromhe village of Mikulino to that of Shamshevo. To the left of theoad between Mikulino and Shamshevo there were large forests,xtending in some places up to the road itself though in others a miler more back from it. Through these forests Denisov and his party rodell day, sometimes keeping well back in them and sometimes coming tohe very edge, but never losing sight of the moving French. Thatorning, Cossacks of Denisov's party had seized and carried off intohe forest two wagons loaded with cavalry saddles, which had stuckn the mud not far from Mikulino where the forest ran close to theoad. Since then, and until evening, the party had the movements ofhe French without attacking. It was necessary to let the French reachhamshevo quietly without alarming them and then, after joiningolokhov who was to come that evening to a consultation at aatchman's hut in the forest less than a mile from Shamshevo, tourprise the French at dawn, falling like an avalanche on theireads from two sides, and rout and capture them all at one blow.
	In their rear, more than a mile from Mikulino where the forestame right up to the road, six Cossacks were posted to report if anyresh columns of French should show themselves.
	Beyond Shamshevo, Dolokhov was to observe the road in the sameay, to find out at what distance there were other French troops. Theyeckoned that the convoy had fifteen hundred men. Denisov had twoundred, and Dolokhov might have as many more, but the disparity ofumbers did not deter Denisov. All that he now wanted to know was whatroops these were and to learn that he had to capture a "tongue"- thats, a man from the enemy column. That morning's attack on the wagonsad been made so hastily that the Frenchmen with the wagons had alleen killed; only a little drummer boy had been taken alive, and as heas a straggler he could tell them nothing definite about the troopsn that column.
	Denisov considered it dangerous to make a second attack for fearf putting the whole column on the alert, so he sent Tikhonhcherbaty, a peasant of his party, to Shamshevo to try and seize ateast one of the French quartermasters who had been sent on indvance.BK14|CH4
	CHAPTER IV
	It was a warm rainy autumn day. The sky and the horizon were bothhe color of muddy water. At times a sort of mist descended, andhen suddenly heavy slanting rain came down.
	Denisov in a felt cloak and a sheepskin cap from which the rainan down was riding a thin thoroughbred horse with sunken sides.ike his horse, which turned its head and laid its ears back, hehrank from the driving rain and gazed anxiously before him. Hishin face with its short, thick black beard looked angry.
	Beside Denisov rode an esaul,* Denisov's fellow worker, also in feltloak and sheepskin cap, and riding a large sleek Don horse.
	*A captain of Cossacks.
	Esaul Lovayski the Third was a tall man as straight as an arrow,ale-faced, fair-haired, with narrow light eyes and with calmelf-satisfaction in his face and bearing. Though it was impossible toay in what the peculiarity of the horse and rider lay, yet at firstlance at the esaul and Denisov one saw that the latter was wet andncomfortable and was a man mounted on a horse, while looking at thesaul one saw that he was as comfortable and as much at ease as alwaysnd that he was not a man who had mounted a horse, but a man who wasne with his horse, a being consequently possessed of twofoldtrength.
	A little ahead of them walked a peasant guide, wet to the skin andearing a gray peasant coat and a white knitted cap.
	A little behind, on a poor, small, lean Kirghiz mount with annormous tail and mane and a bleeding mouth, rode a young officer in alue French overcoat.
	Beside him rode an hussar, with a boy in a tattered French uniformnd blue cap behind him on the crupper of his horse. The boy held ono the hussar with cold, red hands, and raising his eyebrows gazedbout him with surprise. This was the French drummer boy captured thatorning.
	Behind them along the narrow, sodden, cutup forest road came hussarsn threes and fours, and then Cossacks: some in felt cloaks, some inrench greatcoats, and some with horsecloths over their heads. Theorses, being drenched by the rain, all looked black whetherhestnut or bay. Their necks, with their wet, close-clinging manes,ooked strangely thin. Steam rose from them. Clothes, saddles,eins, were all wet, slippery, and sodden, like the ground and theallen leaves that strewed the road. The men sat huddled up trying noto stir, so as to warm the water that had trickled to their bodies andot admit the fresh cold water that was leaking in under theireats, their knees, and at the back of their necks. In the midst ofhe outspread line of Cossacks two wagons, drawn by French horsesnd by saddled Cossack horses that had been hitched on in front,umbled over the tree stumps and branches and splashed through theater that lay in the ruts.
	Denisov's horse swerved aside to avoid a pool in the track andumped his rider's knee against a tree.
	"Oh, the devil!" exclaimed Denisov angrily, and showing his teeth hetruck his horse three times with his whip, splashing himself andis comrades with mud.
	Denisov was out of sorts both because of the rain and also fromunger (none of them had eaten anything since morning), and yet moreecause he still had no news from Dolokhov and the man sent to capture "tongue" had not returned.
	"There'll hardly be another such chance to fall on a transport asoday. It's too risky to attack them by oneself, and if we put itff till another day one of the big guerrilla detachments willnatch the prey from under our noses," thought Denisov, continuallyeering forward, hoping to see a messenger from Dolokhov.
	On coming to a path in the forest along which he could see far tohe right, Denisov stopped.
	"There's someone coming," said he.
	The esaul looked in the direction Denisov indicated.
	"There are two, an officer and a Cossack. But it is notresupposable that it is the lieutenant colonel himself," said thesaul, who was fond of using words the Cossacks did not know.
	The approaching riders having descended a decline were no longerisible, but they reappeared a few minutes later. In front, at a wearyallop and using his leather whip, rode an officer, disheveled andrenched, whose trousers had worked up to above his knees. Behind him,tanding in the stirrups, trotted a Cossack. The officer, a very youngad with a broad rosy face and keen merry eyes, galloped up to Denisovnd handed him a sodden envelope.
	"From the general," said the officer. "Please excuse its not beinguite dry."
	Denisov, frowning, took the envelope and opened it.
	"There, they kept telling us: 'It's dangerous, it's dangerous,'"aid the officer, addressing the esaul while Denisov was reading theispatch. "But Komarov and I"- he pointed to the Cossack- "wererepared. We have each of us two pistols.... But what's this?" hesked, noticing the French drummer boy. "A prisoner? You've alreadyeen in action? May I speak to him?"
	"Wostov! Petya!" exclaimed Denisov, having run through the dispatch.Why didn't you say who you were?" and turning with a smile he heldut his hand to the lad.
	The officer was Petya Rostov.
	All the way Petya had been preparing himself to behave withenisov as befitted a grownup man and an officer- without hinting atheir previous acquaintance. But as soon as Denisov smiled at himetya brightened up, blushed with pleasure, forgot the official mannere had been rehearsing, and began telling him how he had alreadyeen in a battle near Vyazma and how a certain hussar hadistinguished himself there.
	"Well, I am glad to see you," Denisov interrupted him, and hisace again assumed its anxious expression.
	"Michael Feoklitych," said he to the esaul, "this is again fwom thaterman, you know. He"- he indicated Petya- "is serving under him."
	And Denisov told the esaul that the dispatch just delivered was aepetition of the German general's demand that he should join forcesith him for an attack on the transport.
	"If we don't take it tomowwow, he'll snatch it fwom under ouroses," he added.
	While Denisov was talking to the esaul, Petya- abashed byenisov's cold tone and supposing that it was due to the conditionf his trousers- furtively tried to pull them down under his greatcoato that no one should notice it, while maintaining as martial an airs possible.
	"Will there be any orders, your honor?" he asked Denisov, holdingis hand at the salute and resuming the game of adjutant and generalor which he had prepared himself, "or shall I remain with youronor?"
	"Orders?" Denisov repeated thoughtfully. "But can you stay tillomowwow?"
	"Oh, please... May I stay with you?" cried Petya.
	"But, just what did the genewal tell you? To weturn at once?"sked Denisov.
	Petya blushed.
	"He gave me no instructions. I think I could?" he returned,nquiringly.
	"Well, all wight," said Denisov.
	And turning to his men he directed a party to go on to the haltinglace arranged near the watchman's hut in the forest, and told thefficer on the Kirghiz horse (who performed the duties of an adjutant)o go and find out where Dolokhov was and whether he would come thatvening. Denisov himself intended going with the esaul and Petya tohe edge of the forest where it reached out to Shamshevo, to have aook at the part of the French bivouac they were to attack next day.
	"Well, old fellow," said he to the peasant guide, "lead us tohamshevo."
	Denisov, Petya, and the esaul, accompanied by some Cossacks andhe hussar who had the prisoner, rode to the left across a ravine tohe edge of the forest.BK14|CH5
	CHAPTER V
	The rain had stopped, and only the mist was falling and drops fromhe trees. Denisov, the esaul, and Petya rode silently, followinghe peasant in the knitted cap who, stepping lightly with outturnedoes and moving noiselessly in his bast shoes over the roots and weteaves, silently led them to the edge of the forest.
	He ascended an incline, stopped, looked about him, and advanced tohere the screen of trees was less dense. On reaching a large oak treehat had not yet shed its leaves, he stopped and beckoned mysteriouslyo them with his hand.
	Denisov and Petya rode up to him. From the spot where the peasantas standing they could see the French. Immediately beyond the forest,n a downward slope, lay a field of spring rye. To the right, beyond ateep ravine, was a small village and a landowner's house with aroken roof. In the village, in the house, in the garden, by the well,y the pond, over all the rising ground, and all along the road uphillrom the bridge leading to the village, not more than five hundredards away, crowds of men could be seen through the shimmering mist.heir un-Russian shouting at their horses which were strainingphill with the carts, and their calls to one another, could belearly heard.
	"Bwing the prisoner here," said Denisov in a low voice, not takingis eyes off the French.
	A Cossack dismounted, lifted the boy down, and took him toenisov. Pointing to the French troops, Denisov asked him what thesend those of them were. The boy, thrusting his cold hands into hisockets and lifting his eyebrows, looked at Denisov in affright, butn spite of an evident desire to say all he knew gave confusednswers, merely assenting to everything Denisov asked him. Denisovurned away from him frowning and addressed the esaul, conveying hiswn conjectures to him.
	Petya, rapidly turning his head, looked now at the drummer boy,ow at Denisov, now at the esaul, and now at the French in the villagend along the road, trying not to miss anything of importance.
	"Whether Dolokhov comes or not, we must seize it, eh?" saidenisov with a merry sparkle in his eyes.
	"It is a very suitable spot," said the esaul.
	"We'll send the infantwy down by the swamps," Denisov continued.They'll cweep up to the garden; you'll wide up fwom there with theossacks"- he pointed to a spot in the forest beyond the village- "and with my hussars fwom here. And at the signal shot..."
	"The hollow is impassable- there's a swamp there," said the esaul.The horses would sink. We must ride round more to the left...."
	While they were talking in undertones the crack of a shot soundedrom the low ground by the pond, a puff of white smoke appeared,hen another, and the sound of hundreds of seemingly merry Frenchoices shouting together came up from the slope. For a momentenisov and the esaul drew back. They were so near that they thoughthey were the cause of the firing and shouting. But the firing andhouting did not relate to them. Down below, a man wearing somethinged was running through the marsh. The French were evidently firingnd shouting at him.
	"Why, that's our Tikhon," said the esaul.
	"So it is! It is!"
	"The wascal!" said Denisov.
	"He'll get away!" said the esaul, screwing up his eyes.
	The man whom they called Tikhon, having run to the stream, plungedn so that the water splashed in the air, and, having disappearedor an instant, scrambled out on all fours, all black with the wet,nd ran on. The French who had been pursuing him stopped.
	"Smart, that!" said the esaul.
	"What a beast!" said Denisov with his former look of vexation. "Whatas he been doing all this time?"
	"Who is he?" asked Petya.
	"He's our plastun. I sent him to capture a 'tongue.'"
	"Oh, yes," said Petya, nodding at the first words Denisov uttered asf he understood it all, though he really did not understandnything of it.
	Tikhon Shcherbaty was one of the most indispensable men in theirand. He was a peasant from Pokrovsk, near the river Gzhat. Whenenisov had come to Pokrovsk at the beginning of his operations andad as usual summoned the village elder and asked him what he knewbout the French, the elder, as though shielding himself, had replied,s all village elders did, that he had neither seen nor heard anythingf them. But when Denisov explained that his purpose was to kill therench, and asked if no French had strayed that way, the elder repliedhat some "more-orderers" had really been at their village, but thatikhon Shcherbaty was the only man who dealt with such matters.enisov had Tikhon called and, having praised him for his activity,aid a few words in the elder's presence about loyalty to the Tsar andhe country and the hatred of the French that all sons of theatherland should cherish.
	"We don't do the French any harm," said Tikhon, evidently frightenedy Denisov's words. "We only fooled about with the lads for fun, younow! We killed a score or so of 'more-orderers,' but we did no harmlse..."
	Next day when Denisov had left Pokrovsk, having quite forgottenbout this peasant, it was reported to him that Tikhon had attachedimself to their party and asked to be allowed to remain with it.enisov gave orders to let him do so.
	Tikhon, who at first did rough work, laying campfires, fetchingater, flaying dead horses, and so on, soon showed a great likingnd aptitude for partisan warfare. At night he would go out forooty and always brought back French clothing and weapons, and whenold to would bring in French captives also. Denisov then relieved himrom drudgery and began taking him with him when he went out onxpeditions and had him enrolled among the Cossacks.
	Tikhon did not like riding, and always went on foot, never laggingehind the cavalry. He was armed with a musketoon (which he carriedather as a joke), a pike and an ax, which latter he used as a wolfses its teeth, with equal case picking fleas out of its fur orrunching thick bones. Tikhon with equal accuracy would split logsith blows at arm's length, or holding the head of the ax would cuthin little pegs or carve spoons. In Denisov's party he held aeculiar and exceptional position. When anything particularlyifficult or nasty had to be done- to push a cart out of the mudith one's shoulders, pull a horse out of a swamp by its tail, skint, slink in among the French, or walk more than thirty miles in aay- everybody pointed laughingly at Tikhon.
	"It won't hurt that devil- he's as strong as a horse!" they saidf him.
	Once a Frenchman Tikhon was trying to capture fired a pistol atim and shot him in the fleshy part of the back. That wound (whichikhon treated only with internal and external applications ofodka) was the subject of the liveliest jokes by the whole detachment-okes in which Tikhon readily joined.
	"Hallo, mate! Never again? Gave you a twist?" the Cossacks wouldanter him. And Tikhon, purposely writhing and making faces, pretendedo be angry and swore at the French with the funniest curses. The onlyffect of this incident on Tikhon was that after being wounded heeldom brought in prisoners.
	He was the bravest and most useful man in the party. No one foundore opportunities for attacking, no one captured or killed morerenchmen, and consequently he was made the buffoon of all theossacks and hussars and willingly accepted that role. Now he had beenent by Denisov overnight to Shamshevo to capture a "tongue." Buthether because he had not been content to take only one Frenchmanr because he had slept through the night, he had crept by day intoome bushes right among the French and, as Denisov had witnessedrom above, had been detected by them.BK14|CH6
	CHAPTER VI
	After talking for some time with the esaul about next day'sttack, which now, seeing how near they were to the French, heeemed to have definitely decided on, Denisov turned his horse andode back.
	"Now, my lad, we'll go and get dwy," he said to Petya.
	As they approached the watchhouse Denisov stopped, peering intohe forest. Among the trees a man with long legs and long, swingingrms, wearing a short jacket, bast shoes, and a Kazan hat, waspproaching with long, light steps. He had a musketoon over hishoulder and an ax stuck in his girdle. When he espied Denisov heastily threw something into the bushes, removed his sodden hat by itsloppy brim, and approached his commander. It was Tikhon. His wrinklednd pockmarked face and narrow little eyes beamed withelf-satisfied merriment. He lifted his head high and gazed at Denisovs if repressing a laugh.
	"Well, where did you disappear to?" inquired Denisov.
	"Where did I disappear to? I went to get Frenchmen," answered Tikhonoldly and hurriedly, in a husky but melodious bass voice.
	"Why did you push yourself in there by daylight? You ass! Well,hy haven't you taken one?"
	"Oh, I took one all right," said Tikhon.
	"Where is he?"
	"You see, I took him first thing at dawn," Tikhon continued,preading out his flat feet with outturned toes in their bast shoes.I took him into the forest. Then I see he's no good and think I'll gond fetch a likelier one."
	"You see?... What a wogue- it's just as I thought," said Denisovo the esaul. "Why didn't you bwing that one?"
	"What was the good of bringing him?" Tikhon interrupted hastilynd angrily- "that one wouldn't have done for you. As if I don'tnow what sort you want!"
	"What a bwute you are!... Well?"
	"I went for another one," Tikhon continued, "and I crept like thishrough the wood and lay down." (He suddenly lay down on his stomachith a supple movement to show how he had done it.) "One turned up and grabbed him, like this." (He jumped up quickly and lightly.)'Come along to the colonel,' I said. He starts yelling, anduddenly there were four of them. They rushed at me with theirittle swords. So I went for them with my ax, this way: 'What areou up to?' says I. 'Christ be with you!'" shouted Tikhon, wavingis arms with an angry scowl and throwing out his chest.
	"Yes, we saw from the hill how you took to your heels through theuddles!" said the esaul, screwing up his glittering eyes.
	Petya badly wanted to laugh, but noticed that they all refrainedrom laughing. He turned his eyes rapidly from Tikhon's face to thesaul's and Denisov's, unable to make out what it all meant.
	"Don't play the fool!" said Denisov, coughing angrily. "Why didn'tou bwing the first one?"
	Tikhon scratched his back with one hand and his head with the other,hen suddenly his whole face expanded into a beaming, foolish grin,isclosing a gap where he had lost a tooth (that was why he was calledhcherbaty- the gap-toothed). Denisov smiled, and Petya burst into aeal of merry laughter in which Tikhon himself joined.
	"Oh, but he was a regular good-for-nothing," said Tikhon. "Thelothes on him- poor stuff! How could I bring him? And so rude, youronor! Why, he says: 'I'm a general's son myself, I won't go!' heays."
	"You are a bwute!" said Denisov. "I wanted to question..."
	"But I questioned him," said Tikhon. "He said he didn't know much.There are a lot of us,' he says, 'but all poor stuff- only soldiersn name,' he says. 'Shout loud at them,' he says, 'and you'll takehem all,'" Tikhon concluded, looking cheerfully and resolutely intoenisov's eyes.
	"I'll give you a hundwed sharp lashes- that'll teach you to play theool!" said Denisov severely.
	"But why are you angry?" remonstrated Tikhon, "just as if I'dever seen your Frenchmen! Only wait till it gets dark and I'lletch you any of them you want- three if you like."
	"Well, let's go," said Denisov, and rode all the way to theatchhouse in silence and frowning angrily.
	Tikhon followed behind and Petya heard the Cossacks laughing withim and at him, about some pair of boots he had thrown into theushes.
	When the fit of laughter that had seized him at Tikhon's words andmile had passed and Petya realized for a moment that this Tikhonad killed a man, he felt uneasy. He looked round at the captiverummer boy and felt a pang in his heart. But this uneasiness lastednly a moment. He felt it necessary to hold his head higher, torace himself, and to question the esaul with an air of importancebout tomorrow's undertaking, that he might not be unworthy of theompany in which he found himself.
	The officer who had been sent to inquire met Denisov on the way withhe news that Dolokhov was soon coming and that all was well with him.
	Denisov at once cheered up and, calling Petya to him, said: "Well,ell me about yourself."BK14|CH7
	CHAPTER VII
	Petya, having left his people after their departure from Moscow,oined his regiment and was soon taken as orderly by a generalommanding a large guerrilla detachment. From the time he received hisommission, and especially since he had joined the active army andaken part in the battle of Vyazma, Petya had been in a constant statef blissful excitement at being grown-up and in a perpetual ecstaticurry not to miss any chance to do something really heroic. He wasighly delighted with what he saw and experienced in the army, butt the same time it always seemed to him that the really heroicxploits were being performed just where he did not happen to be.nd he was always in a hurry to get where he was not.
	When on the twenty-first of October his general expressed a wisho send somebody to Denisov's detachment, Petya begged so piteously toe sent that the general could not refuse. But when dispatching him heecalled Petya's mad action at the battle of Vyazma, where insteadf riding by the road to the place to which he had been sent, he hadalloped to the advanced line under the fire of the French and hadhere twice fired his pistol. So now the general explicitly forbadeis taking part in any action whatever of Denisov's. That was whyetya had blushed and grown confused when Denisov asked him whether heould stay. Before they had ridden to the outskirts of the forestetya had considered he must carry out his instructions strictly andeturn at once. But when he saw the French and saw Tikhon andearned that there would certainly be an attack that night, heecided, with the rapidity with which young people change their views,hat the general, whom he had greatly respected till then, was aubbishy German, that Denisov was a hero, the esaul a hero, and Tikhon hero too, and that it would be shameful for him to leave them at aoment of difficulty.
	It was already growing dusk when Denisov, Petya, and the esaulode up to the watchhouse. In the twilight saddled horses could beeen, and Cossacks and hussars who had rigged up rough shelters in thelade and were kindling glowing fires in a hollow of the foresthere the French could not see the smoke. In the passage of themall watchhouse a Cossack with sleeves rolled up was chopping someutton. In the room three officers of Denisov's band were converting aoor into a tabletop. Petya took off his wet clothes, gave them toe dried, and at once began helping the officers to fix up theinner table.
	In ten minutes the table was ready and a napkin spread on it. On theable were vodka, a flask of rum, white bread, roast mutton, and salt.
	Sitting at table with the officers and tearing the fat savory muttonith his hands, down which the grease trickled, Petya was in ancstatic childish state of love for all men, and consequently ofonfidence that others loved him in the same way.
	"So then what do you think, Vasili Dmitrich?" said he to Denisov.It's all right my staying a day with you?" And not waiting for aeply he answered his own question: "You see I was told to find out-ell, I am finding out.... Only do let me into the very... into thehief... I don't want a reward... But I want..."
	Petya clenched his teeth and looked around, throwing back his headnd flourishing his arms.
	"Into the vewy chief..." Denisov repeated with a smile.
	"Only, please let me command something, so that I may reallyommand..." Petya went on. "What would it be to you?... Oh, you want anife?" he said, turning to an officer who wished to cut himself aiece of mutton.
	And he handed him his clasp knife. The officer admired it.
	"Please keep it. I have several like it," said Petya, blushing.Heavens! I was quite forgetting!" he suddenly cried. "I have someaisins, fine ones; you know, seedless ones. We have a new sutlernd he has such capital things. I bought ten pounds. I am used toomething sweet. Would you like some?..." and Petya ran out into theassage to his Cossack and brought back some bags which containedbout five pounds of raisins. "Have some, gentlemen, have some!"
	"You want a coffeepot, don't you?" he asked the esaul. "I bought aapital one from our sutler! He has splendid things. And he's veryonest, that's the chief thing. I'll be sure to send it to you. Orerhaps your flints are giving out, or are worn out- that happensometimes, you know. I have brought some with me, here they are"-nd he showed a bag- "a hundred flints. I bought them very cheap.lease take as many as you want, or all if you like...."
	Then suddenly, dismayed lest he had said too much, Petya stopped andlushed.
	He tried to remember whether he had not done anything else thatas foolish. And running over the events of the day he rememberedhe French drummer boy. "It's capital for us here, but what of him?here have they put him? Have they fed him? Haven't they hurt hiseelings?" he thought. But having caught himself saying too much abouthe flints, he was now afraid to speak out.
	"I might ask," he thought, "but they'll say: 'He's a boy himself ando he pities the boy.' I'll show them tomorrow whether I'm a boy. Willt seem odd if I ask?" Petya thought. "Well, never mind!" andmmediately, blushing and looking anxiously at the officers to seef they appeared ironical, he said:
	"May I call in that boy who was taken prisoner and give himomething to eat?... Perhaps..."
	"Yes, he's a poor little fellow," said Denisov, who evidently sawothing shameful in this reminder. "Call him in. His name is Vincentosse. Have him fetched."
	"I'll call him," said Petya.
	"Yes, yes, call him. A poor little fellow," Denisov repeated.
	Petya was standing at the door when Denisov said this. He slipped inetween the officers, came close to Denisov, and said:
	"Let me kiss you, dear old fellow! Oh, how fine, how splendid!"
	And having kissed Denisov he ran out of the hut.
	"Bosse! Vincent!" Petya cried, stopping outside the door.
	"Who do you want, sir?" asked a voice in the darkness.
	Petya replied that he wanted the French lad who had been capturedhat day.
	"Ah, Vesenny?" said a Cossack.
	Vincent, the boy's name, had already been changed by the Cossacksnto Vesenny (vernal) and into Vesenya by the peasants and soldiers.n both these adaptations the reference to spring (vesna) matchedhe impression made by the young lad.
	"He is warming himself there by the bonfire. Ho, Vesenya!esenya!- Vesenny!" laughing voices were heard calling to onenother in the darkness.
	"He's a smart lad," said an hussar standing near Petya. "We gave himomething to eat a while ago. He was awfully hungry!"
	The sound of bare feet splashing through the mud was heard in thearkness, and the drummer boy came to the door.
	"Ah, c'est vous!" said Petya. "Voulez-vous manger? N'ayez paseur, on ne vous fera pas de mal,"* he added shyly and affectionately,ouching the boy's hand. "Entrez, entrez."*[2]
	*"Ah, it's you! Do you want something to eat? Don't be afraid,hey won't hurt you."
	*[2] "Come in, come in."
	"Merci, monsieur,"* said the drummer boy in a trembling almosthildish voice, and he began scraping his dirty feet on the threshold.
	*"Thank you, sir."
	There were many things Petya wanted to say to the drummer boy, butid not dare to. He stood irresolutely beside him in the passage. Thenn the darkness he took the boy's hand and pressed it.
	"Come in, come in!" he repeated in a gentle whisper. "Oh, what can Io for him?" he thought, and opening the door he let the boy pass inirst.
	When the boy had entered the hut, Petya sat down at a distancerom him, considering it beneath his dignity to pay attention toim. But he fingered the money in his pocket and wondered whether itould seem ridiculous to give some to the drummer boy.BK14|CH8
	CHAPTER VIII
	The arrival of Dolokhov diverted Petya's attention from therummer boy, to whom Denisov had had some mutton and vodka given,nd whom he had had dressed in a Russian coat so that he might be keptith their band and not sent away with the other prisoners. Petyaad heard in the army many stories of Dolokhov's extraordinary braverynd of his cruelty to the French, so from the moment he entered theut Petya did not take his eyes from him, but braced himself up morend more and held his head high, that he might not be unworthy even ofuch company.
	Dolokhov's appearance amazed Petya by its simplicity.
	Denisov wore a Cossack coat, had a beard, had an icon of Nicholashe Wonder-Worker on his breast, and his way of speaking andverything he did indicated his unusual position. But Dolokhov, who inoscow had worn a Persian costume, had now the appearance of a mostorrect officer of the Guards. He was clean-shaven and wore auardsman's padded coat with an Order of St. George at hisuttonhole and a plain forage cap set straight on his head. He tookff his wet felt cloak in a corner of the room, and without greetingnyone went up to Denisov and began questioning him about the mattern hand. Denisov told him of the designs the large detachments hadn the transport, of the message Petya had brought, and his owneplies to both generals. Then he told him all he knew of the Frenchetachment.
	"That's so. But we must know what troops they are and theirumbers," said Dolokhov. "It will be necessary to go there. We can'ttart the affair without knowing for certain how many there are. Iike to work accurately. Here now- wouldn't one of these gentlemenike to ride over to the French camp with me? I have brought a spareniform."
	"I, I... I'll go with you!" cried Petya.
	"There's no need for you to go at all," said Denisov, addressingolokhov, "and as for him, I won't let him go on any account."
	"I like that!" exclaimed Petya. "Why shouldn't I go?"
	"Because it's useless."
	"Well, you must excuse me, because... because... I shall go, andhat's all. You'll take me, won't you?" he said, turning to Dolokhov.
	"Why not?" Dolokhov answered absently, scrutinizing the face ofhe French drummer boy. "Have you had that youngster with you long?"e asked Denisov.
	"He was taken today but he knows nothing. I'm keeping him with me."
	"Yes, and where do you put the others?" inquired Dolokhov.
	"Where? I send them away and take a weceipt for them," shoutedenisov, suddenly flushing. "And I say boldly that I have not a singlean's life on my conscience. Would it be difficult for you to sendhirty or thwee hundwed men to town under escort, instead of staining- speak bluntly- staining the honor of a soldier?"
	"That kind of amiable talk would be suitable from this young countf sixteen," said Dolokhov with cold irony, "but it's time for youo drop it."
	"Why, I've not said anything! I only say that I'll certainly go withou," said Petya shyly.
	"But for you and me, old fellow, it's time to drop these amenities,"ontinued Dolokhov, as if he found particular pleasure in speakingf this subject which irritated Denisov. "Now, why have you kepthis lad?" he went on, swaying his head. "Because you are sorry forim! Don't we know those 'receipts' of yours? You send a hundred menway, and thirty get there. The rest either starve or get killed. Sosn't it all the same not to send them?"
	The esaul, screwing up his light-colored eyes, nodded approvingly.
	"That's not the point. I'm not going to discuss the matter. I do notish to take it on my conscience. You say they'll die. All wight. Onlyot by my fault!"
	Dolokhov began laughing.
	"Who has told them not to capture me these twenty times over? But ifhey did catch me they'd string me up to an aspen tree, and with allour chivalry just the same." He paused. "However, we must get toork. Tell the Cossack to fetch my kit. I have two French uniformsn it. Well, are you coming with me?" he asked Petya.
	"I? Yes, yes, certainly!" cried Petya, blushing almost to tearsnd glancing at Denisov.
	While Dolokhov had been disputing with Denisov what should be doneith prisoners, Petya had once more felt awkward and restless; butgain he had no time to grasp fully what they were talking about.If grown-up, distinguished men think so, it must be necessary andight," thought he. "But above all Denisov must not dare to imaginehat I'll obey him and that he can order me about. I will certainly goo the French camp with Dolokhov. If he can, so can I!"
	And to all Denisov's persuasions, Petya replied that he too wasccustomed to do everything accurately and not just anyhow, and thate never considered personal danger.
	"For you'll admit that if we don't know for sure how many of themhere are... hundreds of lives may depend on it, while there arenly two of us. Besides, I want to go very much and certainly will go,o don't hinder me," said he. "It will only make things worse..."BK14|CH9
	CHAPTER IX
	Having put on French greatcoats and shakos, Petya and Dolokhovode to the clearing from which Denisov had reconnoitered the Frenchamp, and emerging from the forest in pitch darkness they descendednto the hollow. On reaching the bottom, Dolokhov told the Cossacksccompanying him to await him there and rode on at a quick trotlong the road to the bridge. Petya, his heart in his mouth withxcitement, rode by his side.
	"If we're caught, I won't be taken alive! I have a pistol,"hispered he.
	"Don't talk Russian," said Dolokhov in a hurried whisper, and athat very moment they heard through the darkness the challenge: "Quiive?"* and the click of a musket.
	*"Who goes there?"
	The blood rushed to Petya's face and he grasped his pistol.
	"Lanciers du 6-me,"* replied Dolokhov, neither hastening norlackening his horse's pace.
	*"Lancers of the 6th Regiment."
	The black figure of a sentinel stood on the bridge.
	"Mot d'ordre."*
	*"Password."
	Dolokhov reined in his horse and advanced at a walk.
	"Dites donc, le colonel Gerard est ici?"* he asked.
	*"Tell me, is Colonel Gerard here?"
	"Mot d'ordre," repeated the sentinel, barring the way and noteplying.
	"Quand un officier fait sa ronde, les sentinelles ne demandent pase mot d'ordre..." cried Dolokhov suddenly flaring up and ridingtraight at the sentinel. "Je vous demande si le colonel est ici."*
	*"When an officer is making his round, sentinels don't ask him forhe password.... I am asking you if the colonel is here."
	And without waiting for an answer from the sentinel, who had steppedside, Dolokhov rode up the incline at a walk.
	Noticing the black outline of a man crossing the road, Dolokhovtopped him and inquired where the commander and officers were. Thean, a soldier with a sack over his shoulder, stopped, came close upo Dolokhov's horse, touched it with his hand, and explained simplynd in a friendly way that the commander and the officers wereigher up the hill to the right in the courtyard of the farm, as healled the landowner's house.
	Having ridden up the road, on both sides of which French talkould be heard around the campfires, Dolokhov turned into theourtyard of the landowner's house. Having ridden in, he dismountednd approached a big blazing campfire, around which sat several menalking noisily. Something was boiling in a small cauldron at the edgef the fire and a soldier in a peaked cap and blue overcoat, lit up byhe fire, was kneeling beside it stirring its contents with a ramrod.
	"Oh, he's a hard nut to crack," said one of the officers who wasitting in the shadow at the other side of the fire.
	"He'll make them get a move on, those fellows!" said another,aughing.
	Both fell silent, peering out through the darkness at the sound ofolokhov's and Petya's steps as they advanced to the fire leadingheir horses.
	"Bonjour, messieurs!"* said Dolokhov loudly and clearly.
	*"Good day, gentlemen."
	There was a stir among the officers in the shadow beyond the fire,nd one tall, long-necked officer, walking round the fire, came upo Dolokhov.
	"Is that you, Clement?" he asked. "Where the devil...? But, noticingis mistake, he broke off short and, with a frown, greeted Dolokhov as stranger, asking what he could do for him.
	Dolokhov said that he and his companion were trying to overtakeheir regiment, and addressing the company in general asked whetherhey knew anything of the 6th Regiment. None of them knew anything,nd Petya thought the officers were beginning to look at him andolokhov with hostility and suspicion. For some seconds all wereilent.
	"If you were counting on the evening soup, you have come tooate," said a voice from behind the fire with a repressed laugh.
	Dolokhov replied that they were not hungry and must push onarther that night.
	He handed the horses over to the soldier who was stirring the potnd squatted down on his heels by the fire beside the officer with theong neck. That officer did not take his eyes from Dolokhov andgain asked to what regiment he belonged. Dolokhov, as if he had noteard the question, did not reply, but lighting a short French pipehich he took from his pocket began asking the officer in how farhe road before them was safe from Cossacks.
	"Those brigands are everywhere," replied an officer from behindhe fire.
	Dolokhov remarked that the Cossacks were a danger only to stragglersuch as his companion and himself, "but probably they would not dareo attack large detachments?" he added inquiringly. No one replied.
	"Well, now he'll come away," Petya thought every moment as hetood by the campfire listening to the talk.
	But Dolokhov restarted the conversation which had dropped andegan putting direct questions as to how many men there were in theattalion, how many battalions, and how many prisoners. Asking abouthe Russian prisoners with that detachment, Dolokhov said:
	"A horrid business dragging these corpses about with one! It woulde better to shoot such rabble," and burst into loud laughter, sotrange that Petya thought the French would immediately detect theirisguise, and involuntarily took a step back from the campfire.
	No one replied a word to Dolokhov's laughter, and a French officerhom they could not see (he lay wrapped in a greatcoat) rose andhispered something to a companion. Dolokhov got up and called tohe soldier who was holding their horses.
	"Will they bring our horses or not?" thought Petya, instinctivelyrawing nearer to Dolokhov.
	The horses were brought.
	"Good evening, gentlemen," said Dolokhov.
	Petya wished to say "Good night" but could not utter a word. Thefficers were whispering together. Dolokhov was a long time mountingis horse which would not stand still, then he rode out of the yard at footpace. Petya rode beside him, longing to look round to seehether or no the French were running after them, but not daring to.
	Coming out onto the road Dolokhov did not ride back across thepen country, but through the village. At one spot he stopped andistened. "Do you hear?" he asked. Petya recognized the sound ofussian voices and saw the dark figures of Russian prisoners roundheir campfires. When they had descended to the bridge Petya andolokhov rode past the sentinel, who without saying a word pacedorosely up and down it, then they descended into the hollow where theossacks awaited them.
	"Well now, good-by. Tell Denisov, 'at the first shot ataybreak,'" said Dolokhov and was about to ride away, but Petya seizedold of him.
	"Really!" he cried, "you are such a hero! Oh, how fine, howplendid! How I love you!"
	"All right, all right!" said Dolokhov. But Petya did not let go ofim and Dolokhov saw through the gloom that Petya was bending towardim and wanted to kiss him. Dolokhov kissed him, laughed, turned hisorse, and vanished into the darkness.BK14|CH10
	CHAPTER X
	Having returned to the watchman's hut, Petya found Denisov in theassage. He was awaiting Petya's return in a state of agitation,nxiety, and self-reproach for having let him go.
	"Thank God!" he exclaimed. "Yes, thank God!" he repeated,istening to Petya's rapturous account. "But, devil take you, Iaven't slept because of you! Well, thank God. Now lie down. We cantill get a nap before morning."
	"But... no," said Petya, "I don't want to sleep yet. Besides Inow myself, if I fall asleep it's finished. And then I am used to notleeping before a battle."
	He sat awhile in the hut joyfully recalling the details of hisxpedition and vividly picturing to himself what would happen nextay.
	Then, noticing that Denisov was asleep, he rose and went out ofoors.
	It was still quite dark outside. The rain was over, but drops weretill falling from the trees. Near the watchman's hut the black shapesf the Cossacks' shanties and of horses tethered together could beeen. Behind the hut the dark shapes of the two wagons with theirorses beside them were discernible, and in the hollow the dyingampfire gleamed red. Not all the Cossacks and hussars were asleep;ere and there, amid the sounds of falling drops and the munching ofhe horses near by, could be heard low voices which seemed to behispering.
	Petya came out, peered into the darkness, and went up to the wagons.omeone was snoring under them, and around them stood saddled horsesunching their oats. In the dark Petya recognized his own horse, whiche called "Karabakh" though it was of Ukranian breed, and went up tot.
	"Well, Karabakh! We'll do some service tomorrow," said he,niffing its nostrils and kissing it.
	"Why aren't you asleep, sir?" said a Cossack who was sitting under aagon.
	"No, ah... Likhachev- isn't that your name? Do you know I havenly just come back! We've been into the French camp."
	And Petya gave the Cossack a detailed account not only of his rideut also of his object, and why he considered it better to risk hisife than to act "just anyhow."
	"Well, you should get some sleep now," said the Cossack.
	"No, I am used to this," said Petya. "I say, aren't the flints inour pistols worn out? I brought some with me. Don't you want any? Youan have some."
	The Cossack bent forward from under the wagon to get a closer lookt Petya.
	"Because I am accustomed to doing everything accurately," saidetya. "Some fellows do things just anyhow, without preparation, andhen they're sorry for it afterwards. I don't like that."
	"Just so," said the Cossack.
	"Oh yes, another thing! Please, my dear fellow, will you sharpeny saber for me? It's got bl..." (Petya feared to tell a lie, andhe saber never had been sharpened.) "Can you do it?"
	"Of course I can."
	Likhachev got up, rummaged in his pack, and soon Petya heard thearlike sound of steel on whetstone. He climbed onto the wagon and satn its edge. The Cossack was sharpening the saber under the wagon.
	"I say! Are the lads asleep?" asked Petya.
	"Some are, and some aren't- like us."
	"Well, and that boy?"
	"Vesenny? Oh, he's thrown himself down there in the passage. Fastsleep after his fright. He was that glad!"
	After that Petya remained silent for a long time, listening to theounds. He heard footsteps in the darkness and a black figureppeared.
	"What are you sharpening?" asked a man coming up to the wagon.
	"Why, this gentleman's saber."
	"That's right," said the man, whom Petya took to be an hussar.Was the cup left here?"
	"There, by the wheel!"
	The hussar took the cup.
	"It must be daylight soon," said he, yawning, and went away.
	Petya ought to have known that he was in a forest with Denisov'suerrilla band, less than a mile from the road, sitting on a wagonaptured from the French beside which horses were tethered, that undert Likhachev was sitting sharpening a saber for him, that the big darklotch to the right was the watchman's hut, and the red blotch belowo the left was the dying embers of a campfire, that the man who hadome for the cup was an hussar who wanted a drink; but he neither knewor waited to know anything of all this. He was in a fairy kingdomhere nothing resembled reality. The big dark blotch might really behe watchman's hut or it might be a cavern leading to the veryepths of the earth. Perhaps the red spot was a fire, or it might behe eye of an enormous monster. Perhaps he was really sitting on aagon, but it might very well be that he was not sitting on a wagonut on a terribly high tower from which, if he fell, he would haveo fall for a whole day or a whole month, or go on falling and nevereach the bottom. Perhaps it was just the Cossack, Likhachev, whoas sitting under the wagon, but it might be the kindest, bravest,ost wonderful, most splendid man in the world, whom no one knew of.t might really have been that the hussar came for water and went backnto the hollow, but perhaps he had simply vanished- disappearedltogether and dissolved into nothingness.
	Nothing Petya could have seen now would have surprised him. He wasn a fairy kingdom where everything was possible.
	He looked up at the sky. And the sky was a fairy realm like thearth. It was clearing, and over the tops of the trees clouds werewiftly sailing as if unveiling the stars. Sometimes it looked as ifhe clouds were passing, and a clear black sky appeared. Sometimest seemed as if the black spaces were clouds. Sometimes the sky seemedo be rising high, high overhead, and then it seemed to sink so lowhat one could touch it with one's hand.
	Petya's eyes began to close and he swayed a little.
	The trees were dripping. Quiet talking was heard. The horses neighednd jostled one another. Someone snored.
	"Ozheg-zheg, Ozheg-zheg..." hissed the saber against thehetstone, and suddenly Petya heard an harmonious orchestra playingome unknown, sweetly solemn hymn. Petya was as musical as Natasha andore so than Nicholas, but had never learned music or thought aboutt, and so the melody that unexpectedly came to his mind seemed to himarticularly fresh and attractive. The music became more and moreudible. The melody grew and passed from one instrument to another.nd what was played was a fugue- though Petya had not the leastonception of what a fugue is. Each instrument- now resembling aiolin and now a horn, but better and clearer than violin or horn-layed its own part, and before it had finished the melody merged withnother instrument that began almost the same air, and then with ahird and a fourth; and they all blended into one and again becameeparate and again blended, now into solemn church music, now intoomething dazzlingly brilliant and triumphant.
	"Oh- why, that was in a dream!" Petya said to himself, as he lurchedorward. "It's in my ears. But perhaps it's music of my own. Well,o on, my music! Now!..."
	He closed his eyes, and, from all sides as if from a distance,ounds fluttered, grew into harmonies, separated, blended, and againll mingled into the same sweet and solemn hymn. "Oh, this iselightful! As much as I like and as I like!" said Petya to himself.e tried to conduct that enormous orchestra.
	"Now softly, softly die away!" and the sounds obeyed him. "Nowuller, more joyful. Still more and more joyful!" And from annknown depth rose increasingly triumphant sounds. "Now voices joinn!" ordered Petya. And at first from afar he heard men's voices andhen women's. The voices grew in harmonious triumphant strength, andetya listened to their surpassing beauty in awe and joy.
	With a solemn triumphal march there mingled a song, the drip fromhe trees, and the hissing of the saber, "Ozheg-zheg-zheg..." andgain the horses jostled one another and neighed, not disturbing thehoir but joining in it.
	Petya did not know how long this lasted: he enjoyed himself allhe time, wondered at his enjoyment and regretted that there was none to share it. He was awakened by Likhachev's kindly voice.
	"It's ready, your honor; you can split a Frenchman in half with it!"
	Petya woke up.
	"It's getting light, it's really getting light!" he exclaimed.
	The horses that had previously been invisible could now be seen toheir very tails, and a watery light showed itself through the bareranches. Petya shook himself, jumped up, took a ruble from his pocketnd gave it to Likhachev; then he flourished the saber, tested it, andheathed it. The Cossacks were untying their horses and tighteningheir saddle girths.
	"And here's the commander," said Likhachev.
	Denisov came out of the watchman's hut and, having called Petya,ave orders to get ready.BK14|CH11
	CHAPTER XI
	The men rapidly picked out their horses in the semidarkness,ightened their saddle girths, and formed companies. Denisov stoody the watchman's hut giving final orders. The infantry of theetachment passed along the road and quickly disappeared amid therees in the mist of early dawn, hundreds of feet splashing throughhe mud. The esaul gave some orders to his men. Petya held his horsey the bridle, impatiently awaiting the order to mount. His face,aving been bathed in cold water, was all aglow, and his eyes werearticularly brilliant. Cold shivers ran down his spine and hishole body pulsed rhythmically.
	"Well, is ev'wything weady?" asked Denisov. "Bwing the horses."
	The horses were brought. Denisov was angry with the Cossackecause the saddle girths were too slack, reproved him, and mounted.etya put his foot in the stirrup. His horse by habit made as if toip his leg, but Petya leaped quickly into the saddle unconscious ofis own weight and, turning to look at the hussars starting in thearkness behind him, rode up to Denisov.
	"Vasili Dmitrich, entrust me with some commission! Please... forod's sake...!" said he.
	Denisov seemed to have forgotten Petya's very existence. He turnedo glance at him.
	"I ask one thing of you," he said sternly, "to obey me and not shoveourself forward anywhere."
	He did not say another word to Petya but rode in silence all theay. When they had come to the edge of the forest it was noticeablyrowing light over the field. Denisov talked in whispers with thesaul and the Cossacks rode past Petya and Denisov. When they hadll ridden by, Denisov touched his horse and rode down the hill.lipping onto their haunches and sliding, the horses descended withheir riders into the ravine. Petya rode beside Denisov, the pulsationf his body constantly increasing. It was getting lighter and lighter,ut the mist still hid distant objects. Having reached the valley,enisov looked back and nodded to a Cossack beside him.
	"The signal!" said he.
	The Cossack raised his arm and a shot rang out. In an instant theramp of horses galloping forward was heard, shouts came fromarious sides, and then more shots.
	At the first sound of trampling hoofs and shouting, Petya lashed hisorse and loosening his rein galloped forward, not heeding Denisov whohouted at him. It seemed to Petya that at the moment the shot wasired it suddenly became as bright as noon. He galloped to the bridge.ossacks were galloping along the road in front of him. On theridge he collided with a Cossack who had fallen behind, but healloped on. In front of him soldiers, probably Frenchmen, wereunning from right to left across the road. One of them fell in theud under his horse's feet.
	Cossacks were crowding about a hut, busy with something. From theidst of that crowd terrible screams arose. Petya galloped up, and theirst thing he saw was the pale face and trembling jaw of a Frenchman,lutching the handle of a lance that had been aimed at him.
	"Hurrah!... Lads!... ours!" shouted Petya, and giving rein to hisxcited horse he galloped forward along the village street.
	He could hear shooting ahead of him. Cossacks, hussars, and raggedussian prisoners, who had come running from both sides of the road,ere shouting something loudly and incoherently. A gallant-lookingrenchman, in a blue overcoat, capless, and with a frowning redace, had been defending himself against the hussars. When Petyaalloped up the Frenchman had already fallen. "Too late again!"lashed through Petya's mind and he galloped on to the place fromhich the rapid firing could be heard. The shots came from the yard ofhe landowner's house he had visited the night before with Dolokhov.he French were making a stand there behind a wattle fence in a gardenhickly overgrown with bushes and were firing at the Cossacks whorowded at the gateway. Through the smoke, as he approached theate, Petya saw Dolokhov, whose face was of a pale-greenish tint,houting to his men. "Go round! Wait for the infantry!" he exclaimeds Petya rode up to him.
	"Wait?... Hurrah-ah-ah!" shouted Petya, and without pausing a momentalloped to the place whence came the sounds of firing and where themoke was thickest.
	A volley was heard, and some bullets whistled past, while otherslashed against something. The Cossacks and Dolokhov galloped afteretya into the gateway of the courtyard. In the dense wavering smokeome of the French threw down their arms and ran out of the busheso meet the Cossacks, while others ran down the hill toward theond. Petya was galloping along the courtyard, but instead ofolding the reins he waved both his arms about rapidly andtrangely, slipping farther and farther to one side in his saddle. Hisorse, having galloped up to a campfire that was smoldering in theorning light, stopped suddenly, and Petya fell heavily on to theet ground. The Cossacks saw that his arms and legs jerked rapidlyhough his head was quite motionless. A bullet had pierced his skull.
	After speaking to the senior French officer, who came out of theouse with a white handkerchief tied to his sword and announced thathey surrendered, Dolokhov dismounted and went up to Petya, who layotionless with outstretched arms.
	"Done for!" he said with a frown, and went to the gate to meetenisov who was riding toward him.
	"Killed?" cried Denisov, recognizing from a distance thenmistakably lifeless attitude- very familiar to him- in which Petya'sody was lying.
	"Done for!" repeated Dolokhov as if the utterance of these wordsfforded him pleasure, and he went quickly up to the prisoners, whoere surrounded by Cossacks who had hurried up. "We won't takehem!" he called out to Denisov.
	Denisov did not reply; he rode up to Petya, dismounted, and withrembling hands turned toward himself the bloodstained,ud-bespattered face which had already gone white.
	"I am used to something sweet. Raisins, fine ones... take them all!"e recalled Petya's words. And the Cossacks looked round in surpriset the sound, like the yelp of a dog, with which Denisov turnedway, walked to the wattle fence, and seized hold of it.
	Among the Russian prisoners rescued by Denisov and Dolokhov wasierre Bezukhov.BK14|CH12
	CHAPTER XII
	During the whole of their march from Moscow no fresh orders had beenssued by the French authorities concerning the party of prisonersmong whom was Pierre. On the twenty-second of October that partyas no longer with the same troops and baggage trains with which itad left Moscow. Half the wagons laden with hardtack that had traveledhe first stages with them had been captured by Cossacks, the otheralf had gone on ahead. Not one of those dismounted cavalrymen who hadarched in front of the prisoners was left; they had allisappeared. The artillery the prisoners had seen in front of themuring the first days was now replaced by Marshal Junot's enormousaggage train, convoyed by Westphalians. Behind the prisoners came aavalry baggage train.
	From Vyazma onwards the French army, which had till then moved inhree columns, went on as a single group. The symptoms of disorderhat Pierre had noticed at their first halting place after leavingoscow had now reached the utmost limit.
	The road along which they moved was bordered on both sides by deadorses; ragged men who had fallen behind from various regimentsontinually changed about, now joining the moving column, now againagging behind it.
	Several times during the march false alarms had been given and theoldiers of the escort had raised their muskets, fired, and runeadlong, crushing one another, but had afterwards reassembled andbused each other for their causeless panic.
	These three groups traveling together- the cavalry stores, theonvoy of prisoners, and Junot's baggage train- still constituted aeparate and united whole, though each of the groups was rapidlyelting away.
	Of the artillery baggage train which had consisted of a hundrednd twenty wagons, not more than sixty now remained; the rest had beenaptured or left behind. Some of Junot's wagons also had been capturedr abandoned. Three wagons had been raided and robbed by stragglersrom Davout's corps. From the talk of the Germans Pierre learnedhat a larger guard had been allotted to that baggage train than tohe prisoners, and that one of their comrades, a German soldier, hadeen shot by the marshal's own order because a silver spoonelonging to the marshal had been found in his possession.
	The group of prisoners had melted away most of all. Of the threeundred and thirty men who had set out from Moscow fewer than aundred now remained. The prisoners were more burdensome to the escorthan even the cavalry saddles or Junot's baggage. They understood thathe saddles and Junot's spoon might be of some use, but that coldnd hungry soldiers should have to stand and guard equally cold andungry Russians who froze and lagged behind on the road (in which casehe order was to shoot them) was not merely incomprehensible butevolting. And the escort, as if afraid, in the grievous conditionhey themselves were in, of giving way to the pity they felt for therisoners and so rendering their own plight still worse, treatedhem with particular moroseness and severity.
	At Dorogobuzh while the soldiers of the convoy, after locking therisoners in a stable, had gone off to pillage their own stores,everal of the soldier prisoners tunneled under the wall and ran away,ut were recaptured by the French and shot.
	The arrangement adopted when they started, that the officerrisoners should be kept separate from the rest, had long since beenbandoned. All who could walk went together, and after the third stageierre had rejoined Karataev and the gray-blue bandy-legged dog thatad chosen Karataev for its master.
	On the third day after leaving Moscow Karataev again fell ill withhe fever he had suffered from in the hospital in Moscow, and as herew gradually weaker Pierre kept away from him. Pierre did not knowhy, but since Karataev had begun to grow weaker it had cost him anffort to go near him. When he did so and heard the subdued moaningith which Karataev generally lay down at the halting places, and whene smelled the odor emanating from him which was now stronger thanefore, Pierre moved farther away and did not think about him.
	While imprisoned in the shed Pierre had learned not with hisntellect but with his whole being, by life itself, that man isreated for happiness, that happiness is within him, in theatisfaction of simple human needs, and that all unhappiness arisesot from privation but from superfluity. And now during these lasthree weeks of the march he had learned still another new, consolatoryruth- that nothing in this world is terrible. He had learned thats there is no condition in which man can be happy and entirelyree, so there is no condition in which he need be unhappy and lackreedom. He learned that suffering and freedom have their limits andhat those limits are very near together; that the person in a bedf roses with one crumpled petal suffered as keenly as he now,leeping on the bare damp earth with one side growing chilled whilehe other was warming; and that when he had put on tight dancing shoese had suffered just as he did now when he walked with bare feethat were covered with sores- his footgear having long since fallen toieces. He discovered that when he had married his wife- of his ownree will as it had seemed to him- he had been no more free than nowhen they locked him up at night in a stable. Of all that he himselfubsequently termed his sufferings, but which at the time hecarcely felt, the worst was the state of his bare, raw, andcab-covered feet. (The horseflesh was appetizing and nourishing,he saltpeter flavor of the gunpowder they used instead of salt wasven pleasant; there was no great cold, it was always warm walkingn the daytime, and at night there were the campfires; the lice thatevoured him warmed his body.) The one thing that was at first hard toear was his feet.
	After the second day's march Pierre, having examined his feet by theampfire, thought it would be impossible to walk on them; but whenverybody got up he went along, limping, and, when he had warmed up,alked without feeling the pain, though at night his feet were moreerrible to look at than before. However, he did not look at them now,ut thought of other things.
	Only now did Pierre realize the full strength of life in man and theaving power he has of transferring his attention from one thing tonother, which is like the safety valve of a boiler that allowsuperfluous steam to blow off when the pressure exceeds a certainimit.
	He did not see and did not hear how they shot the prisoners whoagged behind, though more than a hundred perished in that way. He didot think of Karataev who grew weaker every day and evidently wouldoon have to share that fate. Still less did Pierre think aboutimself. The harder his position became and the more terrible theuture, the more independent of that position in which he foundimself were the joyful and comforting thoughts, memories, andmaginings that came to him.BK14|CH13
	CHAPTER XIII
	At midday on the twenty-second of October Pierre was going uphilllong the muddy, slippery road, looking at his feet and at theoughness of the way. Occasionally he glanced at the familiar crowdround him and then again at his feet. The former and the latterere alike familiar and his own. The blue-gray bandy legged dog ranerrily along the side of the road, sometimes in proof of itsgility and self-satisfaction lifting one hind leg and hopping alongn three, and then again going on all four and rushing to bark athe crows that sat on the carrion. The dog was merrier and sleekerhan it had been in Moscow. All around lay the flesh of differentnimals- from men to horses- in various stages of decomposition; ands the wolves were kept off by the passing men the dog could eat allt wanted.
	It had been raining since morning and had seemed as if at any momentt might cease and the sky clear, but after a short break it beganaining harder than before. The saturated road no longer absorbedhe water, which ran along the ruts in streams.
	Pierre walked along, looking from side to side, counting his stepsn threes, and reckoning them off on his fingers. Mentallyddressing the rain, he repeated: "Now then, now then, go on! Peltarder!"
	It seemed to him that he was thinking of nothing, but far down andeep within him his soul was occupied with something important andomforting. This something was a most subtle spiritual deductionrom a conversation with Karataev the day before.
	At their yesterday's halting place, feeling chilly by a dyingampfire, Pierre had got up and gone to the next one, which wasurning better. There Platon Karataev was sitting covered up- head andll- with his greatcoat as if it were a vestment, telling the soldiersn his effective and pleasant though now feeble voice a story Pierrenew. It was already past midnight, the hour when Karataev was usuallyree of his fever and particularly lively. When Pierre reached theire and heard Platon's voice enfeebled by illness, and saw hisathetic face brightly lit up by the blaze, he felt a painful prick atis heart. His feeling of pity for this man frightened him and heished to go away, but there was no other fire, and Pierre sat down,rying not to look at Platon.
	"Well, how are you?" he asked.
	"How am I? If we grumble at sickness, God won't grant us death,"eplied Platon, and at once resumed the story he had begun.
	"And so, brother," he continued, with a smile on his palemaciated face and a particularly happy light in his eyes, " youee, brother..."
	Pierre had long been familiar with that story. Karataev had toldt to him alone some half-dozen times and always with a speciallyoyful emotion. But well as he knew it, Pierre now listened to thatale as to something new, and the quiet rapture Karataev evidentlyelt as he told it communicated itself also to Pierre. The story wasf an old merchant who lived a good and God-fearing life with hisamily, and who went once to the Nizhni fair with a companion- aich merchant.
	Having put up at an inn they both went to sleep, and next morningis companion was found robbed and with his throat cut. A bloodstainednife was found under the old merchant's pillow. He was tried,nouted, and his nostrils having been torn off, "all in due form" asarataev put it, he was sent to hard labor in Siberia.
	"And so, brother" (it was at this point that Pierre came up), "tenears or more passed by. The old man was living as a convict,ubmitting as he should and doing no wrong. Only he prayed to Godor death. Well, one night the convicts were gathered just as were, with the old man among them. And they began telling what each wasuffering for, and how they had sinned against God. One told how head taken a life, another had taken two, a third had set a house onire, while another had simply been a vagrant and had done nothing. Sohey asked the old man: 'What are you being punished for, Daddy?'- 'I,y dear brothers,' said he, 'am being punished for my own and otheren's sins. But I have not killed anyone or taken anything that wasot mine, but have only helped my poorer brothers. I was a merchant,y dear brothers, and had much property. 'And he went on to tellhem all about it in due order. 'I don't grieve for myself,' heays, 'God, it seems, has chastened me. Only I am sorry for my oldife and the children,' and the old man began to weep. Now it happenedhat in the group was the very man who had killed the othererchant. 'Where did it happen, Daddy?' he said. 'When, and in whatonth?' He asked all about it and his heart began to ache. So he comesp to the old man like this, and falls down at his feet! 'You areerishing because of me, Daddy,' he says. 'It's quite true, lads, thathis man,' he says, 'is being tortured innocently and for nothing! I,'e says, 'did that deed, and I put the knife under your head while youere asleep. Forgive me, Daddy,' he says, 'for Christ's sake!'"
	Karataev paused, smiling joyously as he gazed into the fire, ande drew the logs together.
	"And the old man said, 'God will forgive you, we are all sinnersn His sight. I suffer for my own sins,' and he wept bitter tears.ell, and what do you think, dear friends?" Karataev continued, hisace brightening more and more with a rapturous smile as if what heow had to tell contained the chief charm and the whole meaning of history: "What do you think, dear fellows? That murderer confessed tohe authorities. 'I have taken six lives,' he says (he was a greatinner), 'but what I am most sorry for is this old man. Don't letim suffer because of me.' So he confessed and it was all written downnd the papers sent off in due form. The place was a long way off, andhile they were judging, what with one thing and another, filling inhe papers all in due form- the authorities I mean- time passed. Theffair reached the Tsar. After a while the Tsar's decree came: toet the merchant free and give him a compensation that had beenwarded. The paper arrived and they began to look for the old man.Where is the old man who has been suffering innocently and in vain? Aaper has come from the Tsar!' so they began looking for him," herearataev's lower jaw trembled, "but God had already forgiven him- heas dead! That's how it was, dear fellows!" Karataev concluded and sator a long time silent, gazing before him with a smile.
	And Pierre's soul was dimly but joyfully filled not by the storytself but by its mysterious significance: by the rapturous joy thatit up Karataev's face as he told it, and the mystic significance ofhat joy.BK14|CH14
	CHAPTER XIV
	"A vos places!"* suddenly cried a voice.
	*"To your places."
	A pleasant feeling of excitement and an expectation of somethingoyful and solemn was aroused among the soldiers of the convoy and therisoners. From all sides came shouts of command, and from the leftame smartly dressed cavalrymen on good horses, passing therisoners at a trot. The expression on all faces showed the tensioneople feel at the approach of those in authority. The prisonershronged together and were pushed off the road. The convoy formed up.
	"The Emperor! The Emperor! The Marshal! The Duke!" and hardly hadhe sleek cavalry passed, before a carriage drawn by six gray horsesattled by. Pierre caught a glimpse of a man in a three-cornered hatith a tranquil look on his handsome, plump, white face. It was one ofhe marshals. His eye fell on Pierre's large and striking figure,nd in the expression with which he frowned and looked away Pierrehought he detected sympathy and a desire to conceal that sympathy.
	The general in charge of the stores galloped after the carriage with red and frightened face, whipping up his skinny horse. Severalfficers formed a group and some soldiers crowded round them. Theiraces all looked excited and worried.
	"What did he say? What did he say?" Pierre heard them ask.
	While the marshal was passing, the prisoners had huddled together in crowd, and Pierre saw Karataev whom he had not yet seen thatorning. He sat in his short overcoat leaning against a birch tree. Onis face, besides the look of joyful emotion it had worn yesterdayhile telling the tale of the merchant who suffered innocently,here was now an expression of quiet solemnity.
	Karataev looked at Pierre with his kindly round eyes now filled withears, evidently wishing him to come near that he might sayomething to him. But Pierre was not sufficiently sure of himself.e made as if he did not notice that look and moved hastily away.
	When the prisoners again went forward Pierre looked round.arataev was still sitting at the side of the road under the birchree and two Frenchmen were talking over his head. Pierre did not lookound again but went limping up the hill.
	From behind, where Karataev had been sitting, came the sound of ahot. Pierre heard it plainly, but at that moment he remembered thate had not yet finished reckoning up how many stages still remained tomolensk- a calculation he had begun before the marshal went by. Ande again started reckoning. Two French soldiers ran past Pierre, onef whom carried a lowered and smoking gun. They both looked pale,nd in the expression on their faces- one of them glanced timidly atierre- there was something resembling what he had seen on the face ofhe young soldier at the execution. Pierre looked at the soldier andemembered that, two days before, that man had burned his shirthile drying it at the fire and how they had laughed at him.
	Behind him, where Karataev had been sitting, the dog began toowl. "What a stupid beast! Why is it howling?" thought Pierre.
	His comrades, the prisoner soldiers walking beside him, avoidedooking back at the place where the shot had been fired and the dogas howling, just as Pierre did, but there was a set look on all theiraces.BK14|CH15
	CHAPTER XV
	The stores, the prisoners, and the marshal's baggage train stoppedt the village of Shamshevo. The men crowded together round theampfires. Pierre went up to the fire, ate some roast horseflesh,ay down with his back to the fire, and immediately fell asleep. Hegain slept as he had done at Mozhaysk after the battle of Borodino.
	Again real events mingled with dreams and again someone, he ornother, gave expression to his thoughts, and even to the samehoughts that had been expressed in his dream at Mozhaysk.
	"Life is everything. Life is God. Everything changes and moves andhat movement is God. And while there is life there is joy inonsciousness of the divine. To love life is to love God. Harder andore blessed than all else is to love this life in one's sufferings,n innocent sufferings."
	"Karataev!" came to Pierre's mind.
	And suddenly he saw vividly before him a long-forgotten, kindlyld man who had given him geography lessons in Switzerland. "Wait ait," said the old man, and showed Pierre a globe. This globe waslive- a vibrating ball without fixed dimensions. Its whole surfaceonsisted of drops closely pressed together, and all these drops movednd changed places, sometimes several of them merging into one,ometimes one dividing into many. Each drop tried to spread out andccupy as much space as possible, but others striving to do the sameompressed it, sometimes destroyed it, and sometimes merged with it.
	"That is life," said the old teacher.
	"How simple and clear it is," thought Pierre. "How is it I did notnow it before?"
	"God is in the midst, and each drop tries to expand so as to reflectim to the greatest extent. And it grows, merges, disappears fromhe surface, sinks to the depths, and again emerges. There now,arataev has spread out and disappeared. Do you understand, my child?"aid the teacher.
	"Do you understand, damn you?" shouted a voice, and Pierre woke up.
	He lifted himself and sat up. A Frenchman who had just pushed aussian soldier away was squatting by the fire, engaged in roasting piece of meat stuck on a ramrod. His sleeves were rolled up andis sinewy, hairy, red hands with their short fingers deftly turnedhe ramrod. His brown morose face with frowning brows was clearlyisible by the glow of the charcoal.
	"It's all the same to him," he muttered, turning quickly to aoldier who stood behind him. "Brigand! Get away!"
	And twisting the ramrod he looked gloomily at Pierre, who turnedway and gazed into the darkness. A prisoner, the Russian soldierhe Frenchman had pushed away, was sitting near the fire pattingomething with his hand. Looking more closely Pierre recognized thelue-gray dog, sitting beside the soldier, wagging its tail.
	"Ah, he's come?" said Pierre. "And Plat-" he began, but did notinish.
	Suddenly and simultaneously a crowd of memories awoke in hisancy- of the look Platon had given him as he sat under the tree, ofhe shot heard from that spot, of the dog's howl, of the guiltyaces of the two Frenchmen as they ran past him, of the lowered andmoking gun, and of Karataev's absence at this halt- and he was on theoint of realizing that Karataev had been killed, but just at thatnstant, he knew not why, the recollection came to his mind of aummer evening he had spent with a beautiful Polish lady on theeranda of his house in Kiev. And without linking up the events of theay or drawing a conclusion from them, Pierre closed his eyes,eeing a vision of the country in summertime mingled with memoriesf bathing and of the liquid, vibrating globe, and he sank intoater so that it closed over his head.
	Before sunrise he was awakened by shouts and loud and rapidiring. French soldiers were running past him.
	"The Cossacks!" one of them shouted, and a moment later a crowd ofussians surrounded Pierre.
	For a long time he could not understand what was happening to him.ll around he heard his comrades sobbing with joy.
	"Brothers! Dear fellows! Darlings!" old soldiers exclaimed, weeping,s they embraced Cossacks and hussars.
	The hussars and Cossacks crowded round the prisoners; one offeredhem clothes, another boots, and a third bread. Pierre sobbed as heat among them and could not utter a word. He hugged the first soldierho approached him, and kissed him, weeping.
	Dolokhov stood at the gate of the ruined house, letting a crowd ofisarmed Frenchmen pass by. The French, excited by all that hadappened, were talking loudly among themselves, but as they passedolokhov who gently switched his boots with his whip and watchedhem with cold glassy eyes that boded no good, they became silent.n the opposite side stood Dolokhov's Cossack, counting therisoners and marking off each hundred with a chalk line on the gate.
	"How many?" Dolokhov asked the Cossack.
	"The second hundred," replied the Cossack.
	"Filez, filez!"* Dolokhov kept saying, having adopted thisxpression from the French, and when his eyes met those of therisoners they flashed with a cruel light.
	*"Get along, get along!"
	Denisov, bareheaded and with a gloomy face, walked behind someossacks who were carrying the body of Petya Rostov to a hole that hadeen dug in the garden.BK14|CH16
	CHAPTER XVI
	After the twenty-eighth of October when the frosts began, the flightf the French assumed a still more tragic character, with menreezing, or roasting themselves to death at the campfires, whilearriages with people dressed in furs continued to drive past,arrying away the property that had been stolen by the Emperor, kings,nd dukes; but the process of the flight and disintegration of therench army went on essentially as before.
	From Moscow to Vyazma the French army of seventy-three thousanden not reckoning the Guards (who did nothing during the whole war butillage) was reduced to thirty-six thousand, though not more than fivehousand had fallen in battle. From this beginning the succeedingerms of the progression could be determined mathematically. Therench army melted away and perished at the same rate from Moscow toyazma, from Vyazma to Smolensk, from Smolensk to the Berezina, androm the Berezina to Vilna- independently of the greater or lesserntensity of the cold, the pursuit, the barring of the way, or anyther particular conditions. Beyond Vyazma the French army insteadf moving in three columns huddled together into one mass, and so wentn to the end. Berthier wrote to his Emperor (we know how farommanding officers allow themselves to diverge from the truth inescribing the condition of an army) and this is what he said:
	I deem it my duty to report to Your Majesty the condition of thearious corps I have had occasion to observe during different stagesf the last two or three days' march. They are almost disbanded.carcely a quarter of the soldiers remain with the standards ofheir regiments, the others go off by themselves in differentirections hoping to find food and escape discipline. In generalhey regard Smolensk as the place where they hope to recover. Duringhe last few days many of the men have been seen to throw away theirartridges and their arms. In such a state of affairs, whatever yourltimate plans may be, the interest of Your Majesty's serviceemands that the army should be rallied at Smolensk and should firstf all be freed from ineffectives, such as dismounted cavalry,nnecessary baggage, and artillery material that is no longer inroportion to the present forces. The soldiers, who are worn outith hunger and fatigue, need these supplies as well as a few days'est. Many have died last days on the road or at the bivouacs. Thistate of things is continually becoming worse and makes one fearhat unless a prompt remedy is applied the troops will no longer bender control in case of an engagement.
	November 9: twenty miles from Smolensk.
	After staggering into Smolensk which seemed to them a promised land,he French, searching for food, killed one another, sacked their owntores, and when everything had been plundered fled farther.
	They all went without knowing whither or why they were going.till less did that genius, Napoleon, know it, for no one issued anyrders to him. But still he and those about him retained their oldabits: wrote commands, letters, reports, and orders of the day;alled one another sire, mon cousin, prince d'Eckmuhl, roi deaples, and so on. But these orders and reports were only on paper,othing in them was acted upon for they could not be carried out,nd though they entitled one another Majesties, Highnesses, orousins, they all felt that they were miserable wretches who hadone much evil for which they had now to pay. And though theyretended to be concerned about the army, each was thinking only ofimself and of how to get away quickly and save himself.BK14|CH17
	CHAPTER XVII
	The movements of the Russian and French armies during the campaignrom Moscow back to the Niemen were like those in a game of Russianlindman's bluff, in which two players are blindfolded and one of themccasionally rings a little bell to inform the catcher of hishereabouts. First he rings his bell fearlessly, but when he gets into tight place he runs away as quietly as he can, and often thinking toscape runs straight into his opponent's arms.
	At first while they were still moving along the Kaluga road,apoleon's armies made their presence known, but later when theyeached the Smolensk road they ran holding the clapper of their bellight- and often thinking they were escaping ran right into theussians.
	Owing to the rapidity of the French flight and the Russian pursuitnd the consequent exhaustion of the horses, the chief means ofpproximately ascertaining the enemy's position- by cavalrycouting- was not available. Besides, as a result of the frequentnd rapid change of position by each army, even what information wasbtained could not be delivered in time. If news was received oneay that the enemy had been in a certain position the day before, byhe third day when something could have been done, that army waslready two days' march farther on and in quite another position.
	One army fled and the other pursued. Beyond Smolensk there wereeveral different roads available for the French, and one would havehought that during their stay of four days they might have learnedhere the enemy was, might have arranged some more advantageous plannd undertaken something new. But after a four days' halt the mob,ith no maneuvers or plans, again began running along the beatenrack, neither to the right nor to the left but along the old- theorst- road, through Krasnoe and Orsha.
	Expecting the enemy from behind and not in front, the Frencheparated in their flight and spread out over a distance ofwenty-four hours. In front of them all fled the Emperor, then theings, then the dukes. The Russian army, expecting Napoleon to takehe road to the right beyond the Dnieper- which was the onlyeasonable thing for him to do- themselves turned to the right andame out onto the highroad at Krasnoe. And here as in a game oflindman's buff the French ran into our vanguard. Seeing their enemynexpectedly the French fell into confusion and stopped short from theudden fright, but then they resumed their flight, abandoning theiromrades who were farther behind. Then for three days separateortions of the French army- first Murat's (the vice-king's), thenavout's, and then Ney's- ran, as it were, the gauntlet of the Russianrmy. They abandoned one another, abandoned all their heavy baggage,heir artillery, and half their men, and fled, getting past theussians by night by making semicircles to the right.
	Ney, who came last, had been busying himself blowing up the walls ofmolensk which were in nobody's way, because despite the unfortunatelight of the French or because of it, they wished to punish the floorgainst which they had hurt themselves. Ney, who had had a corps ofen thousand men, reached Napoleon at Orsha with only one thousand meneft, having abandoned all the rest and all his cannon, and havingrossed the Dnieper at night by stealth at a wooded spot.
	From Orsha they fled farther along the road to Vilna, stilllaying at blindman's buff with the pursuing army. At the Berezinahey again became disorganized, many were drowned and manyurrendered, but those who got across the river fled farther. Theirupreme chief donned a fur coat and, having seated himself in aleigh, galloped on alone, abandoning his companions. The others whoould do so drove away too, leaving those who could not to surrenderr die.BK14|CH18
	CHAPTER XVIII
	This campaign consisted in a flight of the French during whichhey did all they could to destroy themselves. From the time theyurned onto the Kaluga road to the day their leader fled from thermy, none of the movements of the crowd had any sense. So one mightave thought that regarding this period of the campaign theistorians, who attributed the actions of the mass to the will ofne man, would have found it impossible to make the story of theetreat fit their theory. But no! Mountains of books have been writteny the historians about this campaign, and everywhere are describedapoleon's arrangements, the maneuvers, and his profound plans whichuided the army, as well as the military genius shown by his marshals.
	The retreat from Malo-Yaroslavets when he had a free road into aell-supplied district and the parallel road was open to him alonghich Kutuzov afterwards pursued him- this unnecessary retreat along aevastated road- is explained to us as being due to profoundonsiderations. Similarly profound considerations are given for hisetreat from Smolensk to Orsha. Then his heroism at Krasnoe isescribed, where he is reported to have been prepared to accept battlend take personal command, and to have walked about with a birch sticknd said:
	"J'ai assez fait l'empereur; il est temps de faire le general,"* butevertheless immediately ran away again, abandoning to its fate thecattered fragments of the army he left behind.
	*"I have acted the Emperor long enough; it is time to act theeneral."
	Then we are told of the greatness of soul of the marshals,specially of Ney- a greatness of soul consisting in this: that heade his way by night around through the forest and across the Dniepernd escaped to Orsha, abandoning standards, artillery, and nine tenthsf his men.
	And lastly, the final departure of the great Emperor from his heroicrmy is presented to us by the historians as something great andharacteristic of genius. Even that final running away, described inrdinary language as the lowest depth of baseness which every child isaught to be ashamed of- even that act finds justification in theistorians' language.
	When it is impossible to stretch the very elastic threads ofistorical ratiocination any farther, when actions are clearlyontrary to all that humanity calls right or even just, the historiansroduce a saving conception of "greatness." "Greatness," it seems,xcludes the standards of right and wrong. For the "great" man nothings wrong, there is no atrocity for which a "great" man can be blamed.
	"C'est grand!"* say the historians, and there no longer existsither good or evil but only "grand" and "not grand." Grand is good,ot grand is bad. Grand is the characteristic, in their conception, ofome special animals called "heroes." And Napoleon, escaping home in aarm fur coat and leaving to perish those who were not merely hisomrades but were (in his opinion) men he had brought there, feels que'est grand,*[2] and his soul is tranquil.
	*"It is great."
	*[2] That it is great.
	"Du sublime (he saw something sublime in himself) au ridicule il n'y qu'un pas,"* said he. And the whole world for fifty years has beenepeating: "Sublime! Grand! Napoleon le Grand!" Du sublime au ridiculel n'y a qu'un pas.
	*"From the sublime to the ridiculous is but a step."
	And it occurs to no one that to admit a greatness notommensurable with the standard of right and wrong is merely todmit one's own nothingness and immeasurable meanness.
	For us with the standard of good and evil given us by Christ, nouman actions are incommensurable. And there is no greatness whereimplicity, goodness, and truth are absent.BK14|CH19
	CHAPTER XIX
	What Russian, reading the account of the last part of the campaignf 1812, has not experienced an uncomfortable feeling of regret,issatisfaction, and perplexity? Who has not asked himself how it ishat the French were not all captured or destroyed when our threermies surrounded them in superior numbers, when the disorderedrench, hungry and freezing, surrendered in crowds, and when (as theistorians relate) the aim of the Russians was to stop the French,o cut them off, and capture them all?
	How was it that the Russian army, which when numerically weaker thanhe French had given battle at Borodino, did not achieve its purposehen it had surrounded the French on three sides and when its aimas to capture them? Can the French be so enormously superior to ushat when we had surrounded them with superior forces we could noteat them? How could that happen?
	History (or what is called by that name) replying to these questionsays that this occurred because Kutuzov and Tormasov and Chichagov,nd this man and that man, did not execute such and such maneuvers...
	But why did they not execute those maneuvers? And why if they wereuilty of not carrying out a prearranged plan were they not triednd punished? But even if we admitted that Kutuzov, Chichagov, andthers were the cause of the Russian failures, it is stillncomprehensible why, the position of the Russian army being what itas at Krasnoe and at the Berezina (in both cases we had superiororces), the French army with its marshals, kings, and Emperor was notaptured, if that was what the Russians aimed at.
	The explanation of this strange fact given by Russian militaryistorians (to the effect that Kutuzov hindered an attack) isnfounded, for we know that he could not restrain the troops fromttacking at Vyazma and Tarutino.
	Why was the Russian army- which with inferior forces had withstoodhe enemy in full strength at Borodino- defeated at Krasnoe and theerezina by the disorganized crowds of the French when it wasumerically superior?
	If the aim of the Russians consisted in cutting off and capturingapoleon and his marshals- and that aim was not merely frustratedut all attempts to attain it were most shamefully baffled- thenhis last period of the campaign is quite rightly considered by therench to be a series of victories, and quite wrongly consideredictorious by Russian historians.
	The Russian military historians in so far as they submit to claimsf logic must admit that conclusion, and in spite of their lyricalhapsodies about valor, devotion, and so forth, must reluctantly admithat the French retreat from Moscow was a series of victories forapoleon and defeats for Kutuzov.
	But putting national vanity entirely aside one feels that such aonclusion involves a contradiction, since the series of Frenchictories brought the French complete destruction, while the series ofussian defeats led to the total destruction of their enemy and theiberation of their country.
	The source of this contradiction lies in the fact that theistorians studying the events from the letters of the sovereignsnd the generals, from memoirs, reports, projects, and so forth,ave attributed to this last period of the war of 1812 an aim thatever existed, namely that of cutting off and capturing Napoleonith his marshals and his army.
	There never was or could have been such an aim, for it would haveeen senseless and its attainment quite impossible.
	It would have been senseless, first because Napoleon'sisorganized army was flying from Russia with all possible speed, thats to say, was doing just what every Russian desired. So what washe use of performing various operations on the French who wereunning away as fast as they possibly could?
	Secondly, it would have been senseless to block the passage of menhose whole energy was directed to flight.
	Thirdly, it would have been senseless to sacrifice one's ownroops in order to destroy the French army, which without externalnterference was destroying itself at such a rate that, though itsath was not blocked, it could not carry across the frontier more thant actually did in December, namely a hundredth part of the originalrmy.
	Fourthly, it would have been senseless to wish to take captive themperor, kings, and dukes- whose capture would have been in theighest degree embarrassing for the Russians, as the most adroitiplomatists of the time (Joseph de Maistre and others) recognized.till more senseless would have been the wish to capture army corps ofhe French, when our own army had melted away to half beforeeaching Krasnoe and a whole division would have been needed to convoyhe corps of prisoners, and when our men were not always gettingull rations and the prisoners already taken were perishing of hunger.
	All the profound plans about cutting off and capturing Napoleonnd his army were like the plan of a market gardener who, when drivingut of his garden a cow that had trampled down the beds he hadlanted, should run to the gate and hit the cow on the head. Thenly thing to be said in excuse of that gardener would be that heas very angry. But not even that could be said for those who drewp this project, for it was not they who had suffered from therampled beds.
	But besides the fact that cutting off Napoleon with his army wouldave been senseless, it was impossible.
	It was impossible first because- as experience shows that ahree-mile movement of columns on a battlefield never coincides withhe plans- the probability of Chichagov, Kutuzov, and Wittgensteinffecting a junction on time at an appointed place was so remote as toe tantamount to impossibility, as in fact thought Kutuzov, who whene received the plan remarked that diversions planned over greatistances do not yield the desired results.
	Secondly it was impossible, because to paralyze the momentum withhich Napoleon's army was retiring, incomparably greater forces thanhe Russians possessed would have been required.
	Thirdly it was impossible, because the military term "to cut off"as no meaning. One can cut off a slice of bread, but not an army.o cut off an army- to bar its road- is quite impossible, for there islways plenty of room to avoid capture and there is the night whenothing can be seen, as the military scientists might convincehemselves by the example of Krasnoe and of the Berezina. It is onlyossible to capture prisoners if they agree to be captured, just as its only possible to catch a swallow if it settles on one's hand. Menan only be taken prisoners if they surrender according to the rulesf strategy and tactics, as the Germans did. But the French troopsuite rightly did not consider that this suited them, since death byunger and cold awaited them in flight or captivity alike.
	Fourthly and chiefly it was impossible, because never since theorld began has a war been fought under such conditions as thosehat obtained in 1812, and the Russian army in its pursuit of therench strained its strength to the utmost and could not have doneore without destroying itself.
	During the movement of the Russian army from Tarutino to Krasnoet lost fifty thousand sick or stragglers, that is a number equal tohe population of a large provincial town. Half the men fell out ofhe army without a battle.
	And it is of this period of the campaign- when the army lacked bootsnd sheepskin coats, was short of provisions and without vodka, andas camping out at night for months in the snow with fifteen degreesf frost, when there were only seven or eight hours of daylight andhe rest was night in which the influence of discipline cannot beaintained, when men were taken into that region of death whereiscipline fails, not for a few hours only as in a battle, but foronths, where they were every moment fighting death from hunger andold, when half the army perished in a single month- it is of thiseriod of the campaign that the historians tell us how Miloradovichhould have made a flank march to such and such a place, Tormasov tonother place, and Chichagov should have crossed (more thannee-deep in snow) to somewhere else, and how so-and-so "routed" andcut off" the French and so on and so on.
	The Russians, half of whom died, did all that could and shouldave been done to attain an end worthy of the nation, and they are noto blame because other Russians, sitting in warm rooms, proposedhat they should do what was impossible.
	All that strange contradiction now difficult to understand betweenhe facts and the historical accounts only arises because theistorians dealing with the matter have written the history of theeautiful words and sentiments of various generals, and not theistory of the events.
	To them the words of Miloradovich seem very interesting, and so doheir surmises and the rewards this or that general received; buthe question of those fifty thousand men who were left in hospitalsnd in graves does not even interest them, for it does not come withinhe range of their investigation.
	Yet one need only discard the study of the reports and general plansnd consider the movement of those hundreds of thousands of men whoook a direct part in the events, and all the questions that seemednsoluble easily and simply receive an immediate and certain solution.
	The aim of cutting off Napoleon and his army never existed except inhe imaginations of a dozen people. It could not exist because itas senseless and unattainable.
	The people had a single aim: to free their land from invasion.hat aim was attained in the first place of itself, as the Frenchan away, and so it was only necessary not to stop their flight.econdly it was attained by the guerrilla warfare which was destroyinghe French, and thirdly by the fact that a large Russian army wasollowing the French, ready to use its strength in case their movementtopped.
	The Russian army had to act like a whip to a running animal. And thexperienced driver knew it was better to hold the whip raised as aenace than to strike the running animal on the head.BK15	                          BOOK FIFTEEN: 1812 - 13BK15|CH1
	CHAPTER I
	When seeing a dying animal a man feels a sense of horror:ubstance similar to his own is perishing before his eyes. But when its a beloved and intimate human being that is dying, besides thisorror at the extinction of life there is a severance, a spiritualound, which like a physical wound is sometimes fatal and sometimeseals, but always aches and shrinks at any external irritating touch.
	After Prince Andrew's death Natasha and Princess Mary alike felthis. Drooping in spirit and closing their eyes before the menacingloud of death that overhung them, they dared not look life in theace. They carefully guarded their open wounds from any rough andainful contact. Everything: a carriage passing rapidly in the street, summons to dinner, the maid's inquiry what dress to prepare, ororse still any word of insincere or feeble sympathy, seemed annsult, painfully irritated the wound, interrupting that necessaryuiet in which they both tried to listen to the stern and dreadfulhoir that still resounded in their imagination, and hindered theirazing into those mysterious limitless vistas that for an instantad opened out before them.
	Only when alone together were they free from such outrage andain. They spoke little even to one another, and when they did itas of very unimportant matters.
	Both avoided any allusion to the future. To admit the possibility of future seemed to them to insult his memory. Still more carefully didhey avoid anything relating to him who was dead. It seemed to themhat what they had lived through and experienced could not bexpressed in words, and that any reference to the details of hisife infringed the majesty and sacredness of the mystery that had beenccomplished before their eyes.
	Continued abstention from speech, and constant avoidance ofverything that might lead up to the subject- this halting on allides at the boundary of what they might not mention- brought beforeheir minds with still greater purity and clearness what they wereoth feeling.
	But pure and complete sorrow is as impossible as pure and completeoy. Princess Mary, in her position as absolute and independentrbiter of her own fate and guardian and instructor of her nephew, washe first to be called back to life from that realm of sorrow in whichhe had dwelt for the first fortnight. She received letters from herelations to which she had to reply; the room in which little Nicholasad been put was damp and he began to cough; Alpatych came toaroslavl with reports on the state of their affairs and with advicend suggestions that they should return to Moscow to the house onhe Vozdvizhenka Street, which had remained uninjured and needednly slight repairs. Life did not stand still and it was necessaryo live. Hard as it was for Princess Mary to emerge from the realmf secluded contemplation in which she had lived till then, andorry and almost ashamed as she felt to leave Natasha alone, yet theares of life demanded her attention and she involuntarily yieldedo them. She went through the accounts with Alpatych, conferred withessalles about her nephew, and gave orders and made preparationsor the journey to Moscow.
	Natasha remained alone and, from the time Princess Mary began makingreparations for departure, held aloof from her too.
	Princess Mary asked the countess to let Natasha go with her tooscow, and both parents gladly accepted this offer, for they sawheir daughter losing strength every day and thought that a changef scene and the advice of Moscow doctors would be good for her.
	"I am not going anywhere," Natasha replied when this was proposed toer. "Do please just leave me alone!" And she ran out of the room,ith difficulty refraining from tears of vexation and irritationather than of sorrow.
	After she felt herself deserted by Princes Mary and alone in herrief, Natasha spent most of the time in her room by herself,itting huddled up feet and all in the corner of the sofa, tearing andwisting something with her slender nervous fingers and gazingntently and fixedly at whatever her eyes chanced to fall on. Thisolitude exhausted and tormented her but she was in absolute need oft. As soon as anyone entered she got up quickly, changed her positionnd expression, and picked up a book or some sewing, evidently waitingmpatiently for the intruder to go.
	She felt all the time as if she might at any moment penetrate thatn which- with a terrible questioning too great for her strength-er spiritual gaze was fixed.
	One day toward the end of December Natasha, pale and thin, dressedn a black woolen gown, her plaited hair negligently twisted into anot, was crouched feet and all in the corner of her sofa, nervouslyrumpling and smoothing out the end of her sash while she looked at corner of the door.
	She was gazing in the direction in which he had gone- to the otheride of life. And that other side of life, of which she had neverefore thought and which had formerly seemed to her so far away andmprobable, was now nearer and more akin and more comprehensiblehan this side of life, where everything was either emptiness andesolation or suffering and indignity.
	She was gazing where she knew him to be; but she could not imagineim otherwise than as he had been here. She now saw him again as head been at Mytishchi, at Troitsa, and at Yaroslavl.
	She saw his face, heard his voice, repeated his words and her own,nd sometimes devised other words they might have spoken.
	There he is lying back in an armchair in his velvet cloak, leaningis head on his thin pale hand. His chest is dreadfully hollow and hishoulders raised. His lips are firmly closed, his eyes glitter, and wrinkle comes and goes on his pale forehead. One of his legswitches just perceptibly, but rapidly. Natasha knows that he istruggling with terrible pain. "What is that pain like? Why does heave that pain? What does he feel? How does it hurt him?" thoughtatasha. He noticed her watching him, raised his eyes, and began topeak seriously:
	"One thing would be terrible," said he: "to bind oneself forevero a suffering man. It would be continual torture." And he lookedearchingly at her. Natasha as usual answered before she had time tohink what she would say. She said: "This can't go on- it won't. Youill get well- quite well."
	She now saw him from the commencement of that scene and relived whathe had then felt. She recalled his long sad and severe look athose words and understood the meaning of the rebuke and despair inhat protracted gaze.
	"I agreed," Natasha now said to herself, "that it would bereadful if he always continued to suffer. I said it then only becauset would have been dreadful for him, but he understood it differently.e thought it would be dreadful for me. He then still wished to livend feared death. And I said it so awkwardly and stupidly! I did notay what I meant. I thought quite differently. Had I said what Ihought, I should have said: even if he had to go on dying, to dieontinually before my eyes, I should have been happy compared withhat I am now. Now there is nothing... nobody. Did he know that? No,e did not and never will know it. And now it will never, never beossible to put it right." And now he again seemed to be saying theame words to her, only in her imagination Natasha this time gaveim a different answer. She stopped him and said: "Terrible for you,ut not for me! You know that for me there is nothing in life but you,nd to suffer with you is the greatest happiness for me," and heook her hand and pressed it as he had pressed it that terriblevening four days before his death. And in her imagination she saidther tender and loving words which she might have said then butnly spoke now: "I love thee!... thee! I love, love..." she said,onvulsively pressing her hands and setting her teeth with a desperateffort...
	She was overcome by sweet sorrow and tears were already rising iner eyes; then she suddenly asked herself to whom she was saying this.gain everything was shrouded in hard, dry perplexity, and againith a strained frown she peered toward the world where he was. Andow, now it seemed to her she was penetrating the mystery.... But athe instant when it seemed that the incomprehensible was revealingtself to her a loud rattle of the door handle struck painfully on herars. Dunyasha, her maid, entered the room quickly and abruptly with arightened look on her face and showing no concern for her mistress.
	"Come to your Papa at once, please!" said she with a strange,xcited look. "A misfortune... about Peter Ilynich... a letter," sheinished with a sob.BK15|CH2
	CHAPTER II
	Besides a feeling of aloofness from everybody Natasha was feeling special estrangement from the members of her own family. All ofhem- her father, mother, and Sonya- were so near to her, so familiar,o commonplace, that all their words and feelings seemed an insulto the world in which she had been living of late, and she felt noterely indifferent to them but regarded them with hostility. She heardunyasha's words about Peter Ilynich and a misfortune, but did notrasp them.
	"What misfortune? What misfortune can happen to them? They just liveheir own old, quiet, and commonplace life," thought Natasha.
	As she entered the ballroom her father was hurriedly coming out ofer mother's room. His face was puckered up and wet with tears. He hadvidently run out of that room to give vent to the sobs that werehoking him. When he saw Natasha he waved his arms despairingly andurst into convulsively painful sobs that distorted his soft roundace.
	"Pe... Petya... Go, go, she... is calling..." and weeping like ahild and quickly shuffling on his feeble legs to a chair, he almostell into it, covering his face with his hands.
	Suddenly an electric shock seemed to run through Natasha's wholeeing. Terrible anguish struck her heart, she felt a dreadful aches if something was being torn inside her and she were dying. Buthe pain was immediately followed by a feeling of release from theppressive constraint that had prevented her taking part in life.he sight of her father, the terribly wild cries of her mother thathe heard through the door, made her immediately forget herself ander own grief.
	She ran to her father, but he feebly waved his arm, pointing toer mother's door. Princess Mary, pale and with quivering chin, cameut from that room and taking Natasha by the arm said something toer. Natasha neither saw nor heard her. She went in with rapidteps, pausing at the door for an instant as if struggling witherself, and then ran to her mother.
	The countess was lying in an armchair in a strange and awkwardosition, stretching out and beating her head against the wall.onya and the maids were holding her arms.
	"Natasha! Natasha!..." cried the countess. "It's not true... it'sot true... He's lying... Natasha!" she shrieked, pushing those arounder away. "Go away, all of you; it's not true! Killed!... ha, ha,a!... It's not true!"
	Natasha put one knee on the armchair, stooped over her mother,mbraced her, and with unexpected strength raised her, turned her faceoward herself, and clung to her.
	"Mummy!... darling!... I am here, my dearest Mummy," she kept onhispering, not pausing an instant.
	She did not let go of her mother but struggled tenderly with her,emanded a pillow and hot water, and unfastened and tore open herother's dress.
	"My dearest darling... Mummy, my precious!..." she whisperedncessantly, kissing her head, her hands, her face, and feeling herwn irrepressible and streaming tears tickling her nose and cheeks.
	The countess pressed her daughter's hand, closed her eyes, andecame quiet for a moment. Suddenly she sat up with unaccustomedwiftness, glanced vacantly around her, and seeing Natasha began toress her daughter's head with all her strength. Then she turnedoward her daughter's face which was wincing with pain and gazedong at it.
	"Natasha, you love me?" she said in a soft trustful whisper.Natasha, you would not deceive me? You'll tell me the whole truth?"
	Natasha looked at her with eyes full of tears and in her lookhere was nothing but love and an entreaty for forgiveness.
	"My darling Mummy!" she repeated, straining all the power of herove to find some way of taking on herself the excess of grief thatrushed her mother.
	And again in a futile struggle with reality her mother, refusingo believe that she could live when her beloved boy was killed inhe bloom of life, escaped from reality into a world of delirium.
	Natasha did not remember how that day passed nor that night, nor theext day and night. She did not sleep and did not leave her mother.er persevering and patient love seemed completely to surround theountess every moment, not explaining or consoling, but recallinger to life.
	During the third night the countess kept very quiet for a fewinutes, and Natasha rested her head on the arm of her chair andlosed her eyes, but opened them again on hearing the bedsteadreak. The countess was sitting up in bed and speaking softly.
	"How glad I am you have come. You are tired. Won't you have someea?" Natasha went up to her. "You have improved in looks and grownore manly," continued the countess, taking her daughter's hand.
	"Mamma! What are you saying..."
	"Natasha, he is no more, no more!"
	And embracing her daughter, the countess began to weep for the firstime.BK15|CH3
	CHAPTER III
	Princess Mary postponed her departure. Sonya and the count triedo replace Natasha but could not. They saw that she alone was ableo restrain her mother from unreasoning despair. For three weeksatasha remained constantly at her mother's side, sleeping on a loungehair in her room, making her eat and drink, and talking to herncessantly because the mere sound of her tender, caressing tonesoothed her mother.
	The mother's wounded spirit could not could not heal. Petya'seath had torn from her half her life. When the news of Petya'seath had come she had been a fresh and vigorous woman of fifty, but aonth later she left her room a listless old woman taking nonterest in life. But the same blow that almost killed the countess,his second blow, restored Natasha to life.
	A spiritual wound produced by a rending of the spiritual body isike a physical wound and, strange as it may seem, just as a deepound may heal and its edges join, physical and spiritual wounds alikean yet heal completely only as the result of a vital force fromithin.
	Natasha's wound healed in that way. She thought her life wasnded, but her love for her mother unexpectedly showed her that thessence of life- love- was still active within her. Love awoke ando did life.
	Prince Andrew's last days had bound Princess Mary and Natashaogether; this new sorrow brought them still closer to one another.rincess Mary put off her departure, and for three weeks lookedfter Natasha as if she had been a sick child. The last weeks passedn her mother's bedroom had strained Natasha's physical strength.
	One afternoon noticing Natasha shivering with fever, Princess Maryook her to her own room and made her lie down on the bed. Natasha layown, but when Princess Mary had drawn the blinds and was going awayhe called her back.
	"I don't want to sleep, Mary, sit by me a little."
	"You are tired- try to sleep."
	"No, no. Why did you bring me away? She will be asking for me."
	"She is much better. She spoke so well today," said Princess Mary.
	Natasha lay on the bed and in the semidarkness of the room scannedrincess Mary's face.
	"Is she like him?" thought Natasha. "Yes, like and yet not like. Buthe is quite original, strange, new, and unknown. And she loves me.hat is in her heart? All that is good. But how? What is her mindike? What does she think about me? Yes, she is splendid!"
	"Mary," she said timidly, drawing Princess Mary's hand to herself,Mary, you mustn't think me wicked. No? Mary darling, how I loveou! Let us be quite, quite friends."
	And Natasha, embracing her, began kissing her face and hands, makingrincess Mary feel shy but happy by this demonstration of hereelings.
	From that day a tender and passionate friendship such as exists onlyetween women was established between Princess Mary and Natasha.hey were continually kissing and saying tender things to onenother and spent most of their time together. When one went out thether became restless and hastened to rejoin her. Together they feltore in harmony with one another than either of them felt with herselfhen alone. A feeling stronger than friendship sprang up between them;n exclusive feeling of life being possible only in each other'sresence.
	Sometimes they were silent for hours; sometimes after they werelready in bed they would begin talking and go on till morning. Theypoke most of what was long past. Princess Mary spoke of herhildhood, of her mother, her father, and her daydreams; andatasha, who with a passive lack of understanding had formerlyurned away from that life of devotion, submission, and the poetryf Christian self-sacrifice, now feeling herself bound to Princessary by affection, learned to love her past too and to understand aide of life previously incomprehensible to her. She did not thinkf applying submission and self-abnegation to her own life, for sheas accustomed to seek other joys, but she understood and loved innother those previously incomprehensible virtues. For Princessary, listening to Natasha's tales of childhood and early youth, therelso opened out a new and hitherto uncomprehended side of life: beliefn life and its enjoyment.
	Just as before, they never mentioned him so as not to lower (as theyhought) their exalted feelings by words; but this silence about himad the effect of making them gradually begin to forget him withouteing conscious of it.
	Natasha had grown thin and pale and physically so weak that they allalked about her health, and this pleased her. But sometimes she wasuddenly overcome by fear not only of death but of sickness, weakness,nd loss of good looks, and involuntarily she examined her bare armarefully, surprised at its thinness, and in the morning noticed herrawn and, as it seemed to her, piteous face in her glass. It seemedo her that things must be so, and yet it was dreadfully sad.
	One day she went quickly upstairs and found herself out of breath.nconsciously she immediately invented a reason for going down, andhen, testing her strength, ran upstairs again, observing the result.
	Another time when she called Dunyasha her voice trembled, so shealled again- though she could hear Dunyasha coming- called her in theeep chest tones in which she had been wont to sing, sing, andistened attentively to herself.
	She did not know and would not have believed it, but beneath theayer of slime that covered her soul and seemed to her impenetrable,elicate young shoots of grass were already sprouting, which takingoot would so cover with their living verdure the grief that weigheder down that it would soon no longer be seen or noticed. The woundad begun to heal from within.
	At the end of January Princess Mary left for Moscow, and the countnsisted on Natasha's going with her to consult the doctors.BK15|CH4
	CHAPTER IV
	After the encounter at Vyazma, where Kutuzov had been unable to holdack his troops in their anxiety to overwhelm and cut off the enemynd so on, the farther movement of the fleeing French, and of theussians who pursued them, continued as far as Krasnoe without aattle. The flight was so rapid that the Russian army pursuing therench could not keep up with them; cavalry and artillery horses brokeown, and the information received of the movements of the Frenchas never reliable.
	The men in the Russian army were so worn out by this continuousarching at the rate of twenty-seven miles a day that they could noto any faster.
	To realize the degree of exhaustion of the Russian army it is onlyecessary to grasp clearly the meaning of the fact that, while notosing more than five thousand killed and wounded after Tarutino andess than a hundred prisoners, the Russian army which left thatlace a hundred thousand strong reached Krasnoe with only fiftyhousand.
	The rapidity of the Russian pursuit was just as destructive to ourrmy as the flight of the French was to theirs. The only differenceas that the Russian army moved voluntarily, with no such threat ofestruction as hung over the French, and that the sick Frenchmenere left behind in enemy hands while the sick Russians left behindere among their own people. The chief cause of the wastage ofapoleon's army was the rapidity of its movement, and a convincingroof of this is the corresponding decrease of the Russian army.
	Kutuzov as far as was in his power, instead of trying to check theovement of the French as was desired in Petersburg and by the Russianrmy generals, directed his whole activity here, as he had done atarutino and Vyazma, to hastening it on while easing the movement ofur army.
	But besides this, since the exhaustion and enormous diminution ofhe army caused by the rapidity of the advance had become evident,nother reason for slackening the pace and delaying presented itselfo Kutuzov. The aim of the Russian army was to pursue the French.he road the French would take was unknown, and so the closer ourroops trod on their heels the greater distance they had to cover.nly by following at some distance could one cut across the zigzagath of the French. All the artful maneuvers suggested by our generalseant fresh movements of the army and a lengthening of its marches,hereas the only reasonable aim was to shorten those marches. Tohat end Kutuzov's activity was directed during the whole campaignrom Moscow to Vilna- not casually or intermittently but soonsistently that he never once deviated from it.
	Kutuzov felt and knew- not by reasoning or science but with thehole of his Russian being- what every Russian soldier felt: thathe French were beaten, that the enemy was flying and must be drivenut; but at the same time he like the soldiers realized all theardship of this march, the rapidity of which was unparalleled foruch a time of the year.
	But to the generals, especially the foreign ones in the Russianrmy, who wished to distinguish themselves, to astonish somebody,nd for some reason to capture a king or a duke- it seemed that now-hen any battle must be horrible and senseless- was the very time toight and conquer somebody. Kutuzov merely shrugged his shoulders whenne after another they presented projects of maneuvers to be made withhose soldiers- ill-shod, insufficiently clad, and half starved- whoithin a month and without fighting a battle had dwindled to halfheir number, and who at the best if the flight continued would haveo go a greater distance than they had already traversed, beforehey reached the frontier.
	This longing to distinguish themselves, to maneuver, to overthrow,nd to cut off showed itself particularly whenever the Russianstumbled on the French army.
	So it was at Krasnoe, where they expected to find one of the threerench columns and stumbled instead on Napoleon himself with sixteenhousand men. Despite all Kutuzov's efforts to avoid that ruinousncounter and to preserve his troops, the massacre of the broken mobf French soldiers by worn-out Russians continued at Krasnoe for threeays.
	Toll wrote a disposition: "The first column will march to so ando," etc. And as usual nothing happened in accord with theisposition. Prince Eugene of Wurttemberg fired from a hill over therench crowds that were running past, and demanded reinforcementshich did not arrive. The French, avoiding the Russians, dispersed andid themselves in the forest by night, making their way round asest they could, and continued their flight.
	Miloradovich, who said he did not want to know anything about theommissariat affairs of his detachment, and could never be foundhen he was wanted- that chevalier sans peur et sans reproche* as hetyled himself- who was fond of parleys with the French, sent envoysemanding their surrender, wasted time, and did not do what he wasrdered to do.
	*Knight without fear and without reproach.
	"I give you that column, lads," he said, riding up to the troops andointing out the French to the cavalry.
	And the cavalry, with spurs and sabers urging on horses that couldcarcely move, trotted with much effort to the column presented tohem- that is to say, to a crowd of Frenchmen stark with cold,rost-bitten, and starving- and the column that had been presentedo them threw down its arms and surrendered as it had long beennxious to do.
	At Krasnoe they took twenty-six thousand prisoners, severalundred cannon, and a stick called a "marshal's staff," and disputeds to who had distinguished himself and were pleased with theirchievement- though they much regretted not having taken Napoleon,r at least a marshal or a hero of some sort, and reproached onenother and especially Kutuzov for having failed to do so.
	These men, carried away by their passions, were but blind tools ofhe most melancholy law of necessity, but considered themselves heroesnd imagined that they were accomplishing a most noble and honorableeed. They blamed Kutuzov and said that from the very beginning of theampaign he had prevented their vanquishing Napoleon, that hehought nothing but satisfying his passions and would not advance fromhe Linen Factories because he was comfortable there, that atrasnoe he checked the advance because on learning that Napoleon washere he had quite lost his head, and that it was probable that he hadn understanding with Napoleon and had been bribed by him, and son, and so on.
	Not only did his contempories, carried away by their passions,alk in this way, but posterity and history have acclaimed Napoleon asrand, while Kutuzov is described by foreigners as a crafty,issolute, weak old courtier, and by Russians as something indefinite- sort of puppet useful only because he had a Russian name.BK15|CH5
	CHAPTER V
	In 1812 and 1813 Kutuzov was openly accused of blundering. Themperor was dissatisfied with him. And in a history recently writteny order of the Highest Authorities it is said that Kutuzov was aunning court liar, frightened of the name of Napoleon, and that byis blunders at Krasnoe and the Berezina he deprived the Russianrmy of the glory of complete victory over the French.*
	*History of the year 1812. The character of Kutuzov andeflections on the unsatisfactory results of the battles at Krasnoe,y Bogdanovich.
	Such is the fate not of great men (grands hommes) whom the Russianind does not acknowledge, but of those rare and always solitaryndividuals who, discerning the will of Providence, submit theirersonal will to it. The hatred and contempt of the crowd punishuch men for discerning the higher laws.
	For Russian historians, strange and terrible to say, Napoleon-hat most insignificant tool of history who never anywhere, even inxile, showed human dignity- Napoleon is the object of adulation andnthusiasm; he is grand. But Kutuzov- the man who from the beginningo the end of his activity in 1812, never once swerving by word oreed from Borodino to Vilna, presented an example exceptional inistory of self-sacrifice and a present conciousness of the futuremportance of what was happening- Kutuzov seems to them somethingndefinite and pitiful, and when speaking of him and of the year812 they always seem a little ashamed.
	And yet it is difficult to imagine an historical character whosectivity was so unswervingly directed to a single aim; and it would beifficult to imagine any aim more worthy or more consonant with theill of the whole people. Still more difficult would it be to findn instance in history of the aim of an historical personage beingo completely accomplished as that to which all Kutuzov's efforts wereirected in 1812.
	Kutuzov never talked of "forty centuries looking down from theyramids," of the sacrifices he offered for the fatherland, or of whate intended to accomplish or had accomplished; in general he saidothing about himself, adopted no prose, always appeared to be theimplest and most ordinary of men, and said the simplest and mostrdinary things. He wrote letters to his daughters and to Madame detael, read novels, liked the society of pretty women, jested withenerals, officers, and soldiers, and never contradicted those whoried to prove anything to him. When Count Rostopchin at the Yauzaridge galloped up to Kutuzov with personal reproaches for havingaused the destruction of Moscow, and said: "How was it you promisedot to abandon Moscow without a battle?" Kutuzov replied: "And I shallot abandon Moscow without a battle," though Moscow was then alreadybandoned. When Arakcheev, coming to him from the Emperor, said thatrmolov ought to be appointed chief of the artillery, Kutuzov replied:Yes, I was just saying so myself," though a moment before he had saiduite the contrary. What did it matter to him- who then alone amid aenseless crowd understood the whole tremendous significance of whatas happening- what did it matter to him whether Rostopchin attributedhe calamities of Moscow to him or to himself? Still less could itatter to him who was appointed chief of the artillery.
	Not merely in these cases but continually did that old man- who byxperience of life had reached the conviction that thoughts and theords serving as their expression are not what move people- useuite meaningless words that happened to enter his head.
	But that man, so heedless of his words, did not once during thehole time of his activity utter one word inconsistent with the singleim toward which he moved throughout the whole war. Obviously in spitef himself, in very diverse circumstances, he repeatedly expressed hiseal thoughts with the bitter conviction that he would not benderstood. Beginning with the battle of Borodino, from which time hisisagreement with those about him began, he alone said that the battlef Borodino was a victory, and repeated this both verbally and inis dispatches and reports up to the time of his death. He aloneaid that the loss of Moscow is not the loss of Russia. In reply toauriston's proposal of peace, he said: There can be no peace, foruch is the people's will. He alone during the retreat of the Frenchaid that all our maneuvers are useless, everything is beingccomplished of itself better than we could desire; that the enemyust be offered "a golden bridge"; that neither the Tarutino, theyazma, nor the Krasnoe battles were necessary; that we must keep someorce to reach the frontier with, and that he would not sacrifice aingle Russian for ten Frenchmen.
	And this courtier, as he is described to us, who lies to Arakcheevo please the Emperor, he alone- incurring thereby the Emperor'sispleasure- said in Vilna that to carry the war beyond the frontiers useless and harmful.
	Nor do words alone prove that only he understood the meaning ofhe events. His actions- without the smallest deviation- were allirected to one and the same threefold end: (1) to brace all histrength for conflict with the French, (2) to defeat them, and (3)o drive them out of Russia, minimizing as far as possible theufferings of our people and of our army.
	This procrastinator Kutuzov, whose motto was "Patience and Time,"his enemy of decisive action, gave battle at Borodino, investinghe preparations for it with unparalleled solemnity. This Kutuzovho before the battle of Austerlitz began said that it would beost, he alone, in contradiction to everyone else, declared till hiseath that Borodino was a victory, despite the assurance of generalshat the battle was lost and despite the fact that for an army to haveo retire after winning a battle was unprecedented. He alone duringhe whole retreat insisted that battles, which were useless then,hould not be fought, and that a new war should not be begun nor therontiers of Russia crossed.
	It is easy now to understand the significance of these events- ifnly we abstain from attributing to the activity of the mass aims thatxisted only in the heads of a dozen individuals- for the events andesults now lie before us.
	But how did that old man, alone, in opposition to the generalpinion, so truly discern the importance of the people's view of thevents that in all his activity he was never once untrue to it?
	The source of that extraordinary power of penetrating the meaning ofhe events then occuring lay in the national feeling which heossessed in full purity and strength.
	Only the recognition of the fact that he possessed this feelingaused the people in so strange a manner, contrary to the Tsar's wish,o select him- an old man in disfavor- to be their representative inhe national war. And only that feeling placed him on that highestuman pedestal from which he, the commander in chief, devoted allis powers not to slaying and destroying men but to saving and showingity on them.
	That simple, modest, and therefore truly great, figure could note cast in the false mold of a European hero- the supposed ruler ofen- that history has invented.
	To a lackey no man can be great, for a lackey has his own conceptionf greatness.BK15|CH6
	CHAPTER VI
	The fifth of November was the first day of what is called the battlef Krasnoe. Toward evening- after much disputing and many mistakesade by generals who did not go to their proper places, and afterdjutants had been sent about with counterorders- when it had becomelain that the enemy was everywhere in flight and that there could andould be no battle, Kutuzov left Krasnoe and went to Dobroe whitheris headquarters had that day been transferred.
	The day was clear and frosty. Kutuzov rode to Dobroe on his plumpittle white horse, followed by an enormous suite of discontentedenerals who whispered among themselves behind his back. All along theoad groups of French prisoners captured that day (there were sevenhousand of them) were crowding to warm themselves at campfires.ear Dobroe an immense crowd of tattered prisoners, buzzing withalk and wrapped and bandaged in anything they had been able to getold of, were standing in the road beside a long row of unharnessedrench guns. At the approach of the commander in chief the buzz ofalk ceased and all eyes were fixed on Kutuzov who, wearing a whiteap with a red band and a padded overcoat that bulged on his roundhoulders, moved slowly along the road on his white horse. One ofhe generals was reporting to him where the guns and prisoners hadeen captured.
	Kutuzov seemed preoccupied and did not listen to what the generalas saying. He screwed up his eyes with a dissatisfied look as heazed attentively and fixedly at these prisoners, who presented apecially wretched appearance. Most of them were disfigured byrost-bitten noses and cheeks, and nearly all had red, swollen andestering eyes.
	One group of the French stood close to the road, and two of them,ne of whom had his face covered with sores, were tearing a piece ofaw flesh with their hands. There was something horrible and bestialn the fleeting glance they threw at the riders and in thealevolent expression with which, after a glance at Kutuzov, theoldier with the sores immediately turned away and went on with whate was doing.
	Kutuzov looked long and intently at these two soldiers. Heuckered his face, screwed up his eyes, and pensively swayed his head.t another spot he noticed a Russian soldier laughingly patting arenchman on the shoulder, saying something to him in a friendlyanner, and Kutuzov with the same expression on his face againwayed his head.
	"What were you saying?" he asked the general, who continuing hiseport directed the commander in chief's attention to some standardsaptured from the French and standing in front of the Preobrazhenskegiment.
	"Ah, the standards!" said Kutuzov, evidently detaching himselfith difficulty from the thoughts that preoccupied him.
	He looked about him absently. Thousands of eyes were looking atim from all sides awaiting a word from him.
	He stopped in front of the Preobrazhensk regiment, sighed deeply,nd closed his eyes. One of his suite beckoned to the soldiersarrying the standards to advance and surround the commander inhief with them. Kutuzov was silent for a few seconds and then,ubmitting with evident reluctance to the duty imposed by hisosition, raised his head and began to speak. A throng of officersurrounded him. He looked attentively around at the circle offficers, recognizing several of them.
	"I thank you all!" he said, addressing the soldiers and then againhe officers. In the stillness around him his slowly uttered wordsere distinctly heard. "I thank you all for your hard and faithfulervice. The victory is complete and Russia will not forget you! Honoro you forever."
	He paused and looked around.
	"Lower its head, lower it!" he said to a soldier who hadccidentally lowered the French eagle he was holding before thereobrazhensk standards. "Lower, lower, that's it. Hurrah lads!" hedded, addressing the men with a rapid movement of his chin.
	"Hur-r-rah!" roared thousands of voices.
	While the soldiers were shouting Kutuzov leaned forward in hisaddle and bowed his head, and his eye lit up with a mild andpparently ironic gleam.
	"You see, brothers..." said he when the shouts had ceased... and allt once his voice and the expression of his face changed. It was noonger the commander in chief speaking but an ordinary old man whoanted to tell his comrades something very important.
	There was a stir among the throng of officers and in the ranks ofhe soldiers, who moved that they might hear better what he wasoing to say.
	"You see, brothers, I know it's hard for you, but it can't beelped! Bear up; it won't be for long now! We'll see our visitorsff and then we'll rest. The Tsar won't forget your service. It isard for you, but still you are at home while they- you see whathey have come to," said he, pointing to the prisoners. "Worse offhan our poorest beggars. While they were strong we didn't spareurselves, but now we may even pity them. They are human beings too.sn't it so, lads?"
	He looked around, and in the direct, respectful, wondering gazeixed upon him he read sympathy with what he had said. His face grewrighter and brighter with an old man's mild smile, which drew theorners of his lips and eyes into a cluster of wrinkles. He ceasedpeaking and bowed his head as if in perplexity.
	"But after all who asked them here? Serves them right, the bloodyastards!" he cried, suddenly lifting his head.
	And flourishing his whip he rode off at a gallop for the firstime during the whole campaign, and left the broken ranks of theoldiers laughing joyfully and shouting "Hurrah!"
	Kutuzov's words were hardly understood by the troops. No one couldave repeated the field marshal's address, begun solemnly and thenhanging into an old man's simplehearted talk; but the heartyincerity of that speech, the feeling of majestic triumph combinedith pity for the foe and consciousness of the justice of our cause,xactly expressed by that old man's good-natured expletives, was noterely understood but lay in the soul of every soldier and foundxpression in their joyous and long-sustained shouts. Afterwardshen one of the generals addressed Kutuzov asking whether he wishedis caleche to be sent for, Kutuzov in answering unexpectedly gave aob, being evidently greatly moved.BK15|CH7
	CHAPTER VII
	When the troops reached their night's halting place on the eighth ofovember, the last day of the Krasnoe battles, it was alreadyrowing dusk. All day it had been calm and frosty with occasionalightly falling snow and toward evening it began to clear. Through thealling snow a purple-black and starry sky showed itself and the frostrew keener.
	An infantry regiment which had left Tarutino three thousand strongut now numbered only nine hundred was one of the first to arrive thatight at its halting place- a village on the highroad. Theuartermasters who met the regiment announced that all the huts wereull of sick and dead Frenchmen, cavalrymen, and members of the staff.here was only one hut available for the regimental commander.
	The commander rode up to his hut. The regiment passed through theillage and stacked its arms in front of the last huts.
	Like some huge many-limbed animal, the regiment began to prepare itsair and its food. One part of it dispersed and waded knee-deephrough the snow into a birch forest to the right of the village,nd immediately the sound of axes and swords, the crashing ofranches, and merry voices could be heard from there. Anotherection amid the regimental wagons and horses which were standing in aroup was busy getting out caldrons and rye biscuit, and feeding theorses. A third section scattered through the village arranginguarters for the staff officers, carrying out the French corpseshat were in the huts, and dragging away boards, dry wood, andhatch from the roofs, for the campfires, or wattle fences to serveor shelter.
	Some fifteen men with merry shouts were shaking down the high wattleall of a shed, the roof of which had already been removed.
	"Now then, all together- shove!" cried the voices, and the hugeurface of the wall, sprinkled with snow and creaking with frost,as seen swaying in the gloom of the night. The lower stakes crackedore and more and at last the wall fell, and with it the men who hadeen pushing it. Loud, coarse laughter and joyous shouts ensued.
	"Now then, catch hold in twos! Hand up the lever! That's it... Wherere you shoving to?"
	"Now, all together! But wait a moment, boys... With a song!"
	All stood silent, and a soft, pleasant velvety voice began toing. At the end of the third verse as the last note died away, twentyoices roared out at once: "Oo-oo-oo-oo! That's it. All together!eave away, boys!..." but despite their united efforts the wattleardly moved, and in the silence that followed the heavy breathingf the men was audible.
	"Here, you of the Sixth Company! Devils that you are! Lend a hand...ill you? You may want us one of these days."
	Some twenty men of the Sixth Company who were on their way intohe village joined the haulers, and the wattle wall, which was abouthirty-five feet long an seven feet high, moved forward along theillage street, swaying, pressing upon and cutting the shoulders ofhe gasping men.
	"Get along... Falling? What are you stopping for? There now..."
	Merry senseless words of abuse flowed freely.
	"What are you up to?" suddenly came the authoritative voice of aergeant major who came upon the men who were hauling their burden.There are gentry here; the general himself is in that hut, and yououl-mouthed devils, you brutes, I'll give it to you!" shouted he,itting the first man who came in his way a swinging blow on the back.Can't you make less noise?"
	The men became silent. The soldier who had been struck groaned andiped his face, which had been scratched till it bled by his fallinggainst the wattle.
	"There, how that devil hits out! He's made my face all bloody," saide in a frightened whisper when the sergeant major had passed on.
	"Don't you like it?" said a laughing voice, and moderating theirones the men moved forward.
	When they were out of the village they began talking again as louds before, interlarding their talk with the same aimless expletives.
	In the hut which the men had passed, the chief officers had gatherednd were in animated talk over their tea about the events of the daynd the maneuvers suggested for tomorrow. It was proposed to make alank march to the left, cut off the Vice-King (Murat) and captureim.
	By the time the soldiers had dragged the wattle fence to its placehe campfires were blazing on all sides ready for cooking, the woodrackled, the snow was melting, and black shadows of soldierslitted to and fro all over the occupied space where the snow had beenrodden down.
	Axes and choppers were plied all around. Everything was done withoutny orders being given. Stores of wood were brought for the night,helters were rigged up for the officers, caldrons were beingoiled, and muskets and accouterments put in order.
	The wattle wall the men had brought was set up in a semicircle byhe Eighth Company as a shelter from the north, propped up by musketests, and a campfire was built before it. They beat the tattoo,alled the roll, had supper, and settled down round the fires forhe night- some repairing their footgear, some smoking pipes, and sometripping themselves naked to steam the lice out of their shirts.BK15|CH8
	CHAPTER VIII
	One would have thought that under the almost incredibly wretchedonditions the Russian soldiers were in at that time- lacking warmoots and sheepskin coats, without a roof over their heads, in thenow with eighteen degrees of frost, and without even full rationsthe commissariat did not always keep up with the troops)- theyould have presented a very sad and depressing spectacle.
	On the contrary, the army had never under the best materialonditions presented a more cheerful and animated aspect. This wasecause all who began to grow depressed or who lost strength wereifted out of the army day by day. All the physically or morallyeak had long since been left behind and only the flower of thermy- physically and mentally- remained.
	More men collected behind the wattle fence of the Eighth Companyhan anywhere else. Two sergeants major were sitting with them andheir campfire blazed brighter than others. For leave to sit byheir wattle they demanded contributions of fuel.
	"Eh, Makeev! What has become of you, you son of a bitch? Are youost or have the wolves eaten you? Fetch some more wood!" shouted aed-haired and red-faced man, screwing up his eyes and blinkingecause of the smoke but not moving back from the fire. "And you,ackdaw, go and fetch some wood!" said he to another soldier.
	This red-haired man was neither a sergeant nor a corporal, but beingobust he ordered about those weaker than himself. The soldier theyalled "Jackdaw," a thin little fellow with a sharp nose, rosebediently and was about to go but at that instant there came into theight of the fire the slender, handsome figure of a young soldierarrying a load of wood.
	"Bring it here- that's fine!"
	They split up the wood, pressed it down on the fire, blew at it withheir mouths, and fanned it with the skirts of their greatcoats,aking the flames hiss and crackle. The men drew nearer and litheir pipes. The handsome young soldier who had brought the wood,etting his arms akimbo, began stamping his cold feet rapidly andeftly on the spot where he stood.
	"Mother! The dew is cold but clear.... It's well that I'm ausketeer..." he sang, pretending to hiccough after each syllable.
	"Look out, your soles will fly off!" shouted the red-haired man,oticing that the sole of the dancer's boot was hanging loose. "What aellow you are for dancing!"
	The dancer stopped, pulled off the loose piece of leather, and threwt on the fire.
	"Right enough, friend," said he, and, having sat down, took out ofis knapsack a scrap of blue French cloth, and wrapped it round hisoot. "It's the steam that spoils them," he added, stretching outis feet toward the fire.
	"They'll soon be issuing us new ones. They say that when we'veinished hammering them, we're to receive double kits!"
	"And that son of a bitch Petrov has lagged behind after all, iteems," said one sergeant major.
	"I've had an eye on him this long while," said the other.
	"Well, he's a poor sort of soldier..."
	"But in the Third Company they say nine men were missing yesterday."
	"Yes, it's all very well, but when a man's feet are frozen how cane walk?"
	"Eh? Don't talk nonsense!" said a sergeant major.
	"Do you want to be doing the same?" said an old soldier, turningeproachfully to the man who had spoken of frozen feet.
	"Well, you know," said the sharp-nosed man they called Jackdaw in squeaky and unsteady voice, raising himself at the other side of theire, "a plump man gets thin, but for a thin one it's death. Takee, now! I've got no strength left," he added, with suddenesolution turning to the sergeant major. "Tell them to send me toospital; I'm aching all over; anyway I shan't be able to keep up."
	"That'll do, that'll do!" replied the sergeant major quietly.
	The soldier said no more and the talk went on.
	"What a lot of those Frenchies were taken today, and the fact ishat not one of them had what you might call real boots on," said aoldier, starting a new theme. "They were no more than make-believes."
	"The Cossacks have taken their boots. They were clearing the hut forhe colonel and carried them out. It was pitiful to see them, boys,"ut in the dancer. "As they turned them over one seemed still alivend, would you believe it, he jabbered something in their lingo."
	"But they're a clean folk, lads," the first man went on; "he washite- as white as birchbark- and some of them are such fineellows, you might think they were nobles."
	"Well, what do you think? They make soldiers of all classes there."
	"But they don't understand our talk at all," said the dancer with puzzled smile. "I asked him whose subject he was, and he jabbered inis own way. A queer lot!"
	"But it's strange, friends," continued the man who had wondered atheir whiteness, "the peasants at Mozhaysk were saying that whenhey began burying the dead- where the battle was you know- well,hose dead had been lying there for nearly a month, and says theeasant, 'they lie as white as paper, clean, and not as much smells a puff of powder smoke.'"
	"Was it from the cold?" asked someone.
	"You're a clever fellow! From the cold indeed! Why, it was hot. Ift had been from the cold, ours would not have rotted either. 'But,'e says, 'go up to ours and they are all rotten and maggoty. So,' heays, 'we tie our faces up with kerchiefs and turn our heads away ase drag them off: we can hardly do it. But theirs,' he says, 'arehite as paper and not so much smell as a whiff of gunpowder.'"
	All were silent.
	"It must be from their food," said the sergeant major. "They used toobble the same food as the gentry."
	No one contradicted him.
	"That peasant near Mozhaysk where the battle was said the men werell called up from ten villages around and they carted for twenty daysnd still didn't finish carting the dead away. And as for theolves, he says..."
	"That was a real battle," said an old soldier. "It's the only oneorth remembering; but since that... it's only been tormenting folk."
	"And do you know, Daddy, the day before yesterday we ran at themnd, my word, they didn't let us get near before they just threwown their muskets and went on their knees. 'Pardon!' they say. That'snly one case. They say Platov took 'Poleon himself twice. But heidn't know the right charm. He catches him and catches him- noood! He turns into a bird in his hands and flies away. And there's noay of killing him either."
	"You're a first-class liar, Kiselev, when I come to look at you!"
	"Liar, indeed! It's the real truth."
	"If he fell into my hands, when I'd caught him I'd bury him in theround with an aspen stake to fix him down. What a lot of men he'suined!"
	"Well, anyhow we're going to end it. He won't come here again,"emarked the old soldier, yawning.
	The conversation flagged, and the soldiers began settling down toleep.
	"Look at the stars. It's wonderful how they shine! You would thinkhe women had spread out their linen," said one of the men, gazingith admiration at the Milky Way.
	"That's a sign of a good harvest next year."
	"We shall want some more wood."
	"You warm your back and your belly gets frozen. That's queer."
	"O Lord!"
	"What are you pushing for? Is the fire only for you? Look how he'sprawling!"
	In the silence that ensued, the snoring of those who had fallensleep could be heard. Others turned over and warmed themselves, nownd again exchanging a few words. From a campfire a hundred pacesff came a sound of general, merry laughter.
	"Hark at them roaring there in the Fifth Company!" said one of theoldiers, and what a lot of them there are!"
	One of the men got up and went over to the Fifth Company.
	"They're having such fun," said he, coming back. "Two Frenchies haveurned up. One's quite frozen and the other's an awful swaggerer. He'singing songs...."
	"Oh, I'll go across and have a look...."
	And several of the men went over to the Fifth Company.BK15|CH9
	CHAPTER IX
	The fifth company was bivouacking at the very edge of the forest. huge campfire was blazing brightly in the midst of the snow,ighting up the branches of trees heavy with hoarfrost.
	About midnight they heard the sound of steps in the snow of theorest, and the crackling of dry branches.
	"A bear, lads," said one of the men.
	They all raised their heads to listen, and out of the forest intohe bright firelight stepped two strangely clad human figures clingingo one another.
	These were two Frenchmen who had been hiding in the forest. Theyame up to the fire, hoarsely uttering something in a language ouroldiers did not understand. One was taller than the other; he wore anfficer's hat and seemed quite exhausted. On approaching the fire head been going to sit down, but fell. The other, a short sturdyoldier with a shawl tied round his head, was stronger. He raisedis companion and said something, pointing to his mouth. Theoldiers surrounded the Frenchmen, spread a greatcoat on the groundor the sick man, and brought some buckwheat porridge and vodka foroth of them.
	The exhausted French officer was Ramballe and the man with hisead wrapped in the shawl was Morel, his orderly.
	When Morel had drunk some vodka and finished his bowl of porridge heuddenly became unnaturally merry and chattered incessantly to theoldiers, who could not understand him. Ramballe refused food andesting his head on his elbow lay silent beside the campfire,ooking at the Russian soldiers with red and vacant eyes. Occasionallye emitted a long-drawn groan and then again became silent. Morel,ointing to his shoulders, tried to impress on the soldiers the facthat Ramballe was an officer and ought to be warmed. A Russian officerho had come up to the fire sent to ask his colonel whether he wouldot take a French officer into his hut to warm him, and when theessenger returned and said that the colonel wished the officer toe brought to him, Ramballe was told to go. He rose and tried to walk,ut staggered and would have fallen had not a soldier standing by heldim up.
	"You won't do it again, eh?" said one of the soldiers, winking andurning mockingly to Ramballe.
	"Oh, you fool! Why talk rubbish, lout that you are- a real peasant!"ame rebukes from all sides addressed to the jesting soldier.
	They surrounded Ramballe, lifted him on the crossed arms of twooldiers, and carried him to the hut. Ramballe put his arms aroundheir necks while they carried him and began wailing plaintively:
	"Oh, you fine fellows, my kind, kind friends! These are men! Oh,y brave, kind friends," and he leaned his head against the shoulderf one of the men like a child.
	Meanwhile Morel was sitting in the best place by the fire,urrounded by the soldiers.
	Morel, a short sturdy Frenchman with inflamed and streaming eyes,as wearing a woman's cloak and had a shawl tied woman fashion roundis head over his cap. He was evidently tipsy, and was singing arench song in a hoarse broken voice, with an arm thrown round theearest soldier. The soldiers simply held their sides as theyatched him.
	"Now then, now then, teach us how it goes! I'll soon pick it up. Hows it?" said the man- a singer and a wag- whom Morel was embracing.
	"Vive Henri Quatre! Vive ce roi valiant!" sang Morel, winking. "Ceiable a quatre..."*
	*"Long live Henry the Fourth, that valiant king! That rowdy devil."
	"Vivarika! Vif-seruvaru! Sedyablyaka!" repeated the soldier,lourishing his arm and really catching the tune.
	"Bravo! Ha, ha, ha!" rose their rough, joyous laughter from allides.
	Morel, wrinkling up his face, laughed too.
	"Well, go on, go on!"
	    "Qui eut le triple talent,
	    De boire, de battre,
	    Et d'etre un vert galant."*
	*Who had a triple talent
	 For drinking, for fighting,
	 And for being a gallant old boy...
	"It goes smoothly, too. Well, now, Zaletaev!"
	"Ke..." Zaletaev, brought out with effort: "ke-e-e-e," he drawled,aboriously pursing his lips, "le-trip-ta-la-de-bu-de-ba, ee-tra-va-ga-la " he sang.
	"Fine! Just like the Frenchie! Oh, ho ho! Do you want some more toat?"
	"Give him some porridge: it takes a long time to get filled up aftertarving."
	They gave him some more porridge and Morel with a laugh set toork on his third bowl. All the young soldiers smiled gaily as theyatched him. The older men, who thought it undignified to amusehemselves with such nonsense, continued to lie at the opposite sidef the fire, but one would occasionally raise himself on an elbownd glance at Morel with a smile.
	"They are men too," said one of them as he wrapped himself up in hisoat. "Even wormwood grows on its own root."
	"O Lord, O Lord! How starry it is! Tremendous! That means a hardrost...."
	They all grew silent. The stars, as if knowing that no one wasooking at them, began to disport themselves in the dark sky: nowlaring up, now vanishing, now trembling, they were busy whisperingomething gladsome and mysterious to one another.BK15|CH10
	CHAPTER X
	The French army melted away at the uniform rate of a mathematicalrogression; and that crossing of the Berezina about which so much haseen written was only one intermediate stage in its destruction, andot at all the decisive episode of the campaign. If so much has beennd still is written about the Berezina, on the French side this isnly because at the broken bridge across that river the calamitiesheir army had been previously enduring were suddenly concentratedt one moment into a tragic spectacle that remained in every memory,nd on the Russian side merely because in Petersburg- far from theeat of war- a plan (again one of Pfuel's) had been devised to catchapoleon in a strategic trap at the Berezina River. Everyone assuredimself that all would happen according to plan, and thereforensisted that it was just the crossing of the Berezina thatestroyed the French army. In reality the results of the crossing wereuch less disastrous to the French- in guns and men lost- than Krasnoead been, as the figures show.
	The sole importance of the crossing of the Berezina lies in the facthat it plainly and indubitably proved the fallacy of all the plansor cutting off the enemy's retreat and the soundness of the onlyossible line of action- the one Kutuzov and the general mass of thermy demanded- namely, simply to follow the enemy up. The French crowdled at a continually increasing speed and all its energy was directedo reaching its goal. It fled like a wounded animal and it wasmpossible to block its path. This was shown not so much by therrangements it made for crossing as by what took place at theridges. When the bridges broke down, unarmed soldiers, people fromoscow and women with children who were with the French transport,ll- carried on by vis inertiae- pressed forward into boats and intohe ice-covered water and did not, surrender.
	That impulse was reasonable. The condition of fugitives and ofursuers was equally bad. As long as they remained with their owneople each might hope for help from his fellows and the definitelace he held among them. But those who surrendered, while remainingn the same pitiful plight, would be on a lower level to claim a sharen the necessities of life. The French did not need to be informedf the fact that half the prisoners- with whom the Russians did notnow what to do- perished of cold and hunger despite their captors'esire to save them; they felt that it could not be otherwise. Theost compassionate Russian commanders, those favorable to therench- and even the Frenchmen in the Russian service- could doothing for the prisoners. The French perished from the conditionso which the Russian army was itself exposed. It was impossible toake bread and clothes from our hungry and indispensable soldiers toive to the French who, though not harmful, or hated, or guilty,ere simply unnecessary. Some Russians even did that, but they werexceptions.
	Certain destruction lay behind the French but in front there wasope. Their ships had been burned, there was no salvation save inollective flight, and on that the whole strength of the French wasoncentrated.
	The farther they fled the more wretched became the plight of theemnant, especially after the Berezina, on which (in consequence ofhe Petersburg plan) special hopes had been placed by the Russians,nd the keener grew the passions of the Russian commanders, blamed onenother and Kutuzov most of all. Anticipation that the failure ofhe Petersburg Berezina plan would be attributed to Kutuzov led toissatisfaction, contempt, and ridicule, more and more stronglyxpressed. The ridicule and contempt were of course expressed in aespectful form, making it impossible for him to ask wherein he was tolame. They did not talk seriously to him; when reporting to him orsking for his sanction they appeared to be fulfilling a regrettableormality, but they winked behind his back and tried to mislead him atvery turn.
	Because they could not understand him all these people assumedhat it was useless to talk to the old man; that he would neverrasp the profundity of their plans, that he would answer with hishrases (which they thought were mere phrases) about a "goldenridge," about the impossibility of crossing the frontier with a crowdf tatterdemalions, and so forth. They had heard all that before.nd all he said- that it was necessary to await provisions, or thathe men had no boots- was so simple, while what they proposed was soomplicated and clever, that it was evident that he was old and stupidnd that they, though not in power, were commanders of genius.
	After the junction with the army of the brilliant admiral andetersburg hero Wittgenstein, this mood and the gossip of the staffeached their maximum. Kutuzov saw this and merely sighed and shruggedis shoulders. Only once, after the affair of the Berezina, did he getngry and write to Bennigsen (who reported separately to themperor) the following letter:
	"On account of your spells of ill health, will your excellencylease be so good as to set off for Kaluga on receipt of this, andhere await further commands and appointments from His Imperialajesty."
	But after Bennigsen's departure, the Grand Duke Tsarevichonstantine Pavlovich joined the army. He had taken part in theeginning of the campaign but had subsequently been removed from thermy by Kutuzov. Now having come to the army, he informed Kutuzov ofhe Emperor's displeasure at the poor success of our forces and thelowness of their advance. The Emperor intended to join the armyersonally in a few days' time.
	The old man, experienced in court as well as in military affairs-his same Kutuzov who in August had been chosen commander in chiefgainst the sovereign's wishes and who had removed the Grand Dukend heir- apparent from the army- who on his own authority andontrary to the Emperor's will had decided on the abandonment ofoscow, now realized at once that his day was over, that his partas played, and that the power he was supposed to hold was no longeris. And he understood this not merely from the attitude of the court.e saw on the one hand that the military business in which he hadlayed his part was ended and felt that his mission wasccomplished; and at the same time he began to be conscious of thehysical weariness of his aged body and of the necessity of physicalest.
	On the twenty-ninth of November Kutuzov entered Vilna- his "dearilna" as he called it. Twice during his career Kutuzov had beenovernor of Vilna. In that wealthy town, which had not been injured,e found old friends and associations, besides the comforts of life ofhich he had so long been deprived. And he suddenly turned from theares of army and state and, as far as the passions that seethedround him allowed, immersed himself in the quiet life to which he hadormerly been accustomed, as if all that was taking place and all thatad still to be done in the realm of history did not concern him atll.
	Chichagov, one of the most zealous "cutters-off" andbreakers-up," who had first wanted to effect a diversion in Greecend then in Warsaw but never wished to go where he was sent:hichagov, noted for the boldness with which he spoke to themperor, and who considered Kutuzov to be under an obligation to himecause when he was sent to make peace with Turkey in 1811ndependently of Kutuzov, and found that peace had already beenoncluded, he admitted to the Emperor that the merit of securinghat peace was really Kutuzov's; this Chichagov was the first toeet Kutuzov at the castle where the latter was to stay. In undressaval uniform, with a dirk, and holding his cap under his arm, heanded Kutuzov a garrison report and the keys of the town. Theontemptuously respectful attitude of the younger men to the old mann his dotage was expressed in the highest degree by the behavior ofhichagov, who knew of the accusations that were being directedgainst Kutuzov.
	When speaking to Chichagov, Kutuzov incidentally mentioned thathe vehicles packed with china that had been captured from him atorisov had been recovered and would be restored to him.
	"You mean to imply that I have nothing to eat out of.... On theontrary, I can supply you with everything even if you want to giveinner parties," warmly replied Chichagov, who tried by every worde spoke to prove his own rectitude and therefore imagined Kutuzovo be animated by the same desire.
	Kutuzov, shrugging his shoulders, replied with his subtleenetrating smile: "I meant merely to say what I said."
	Contrary to the Emperor's wish Kutuzov detained the greater partf the army at Vilna. Those about him said that he becamextraordinarily slack and physically feeble during his stay in thatown. He attended to army affairs reluctantly, left everything tois generals, and while awaiting the Emperor's arrival led aissipated life.
	Having left Petersburg on the seventh of December with his suite-ount Tolstoy, Prince Volkonski, Arakcheev, and others- the Emperoreached Vilna on the eleventh, and in his traveling sleigh drovetraight to the castle. In spite of the severe frost some hundredenerals and staff officers in full parade uniform stood in front ofhe castle, as well as a guard of honor of the Semenov regiment.
	A courier who galloped to the castle in advance, in a troyka withhree foam-flecked horses, shouted "Coming!" and Konovnitsyn rushednto the vestibule to inform Kutuzov, who was waiting in the hallorter's little lodge.
	A minute later the old man's large stout figure in full-dressniform, his chest covered with orders and a scarf drawn round histomach, waddled out into the porch. He put on his hat with itseaks to the sides and, holding his gloves in his hand and walkingith an effort sideways down the steps to the level of the street,ook in his hand the report he had prepared for the Emperor.
	There was running to and fro and whispering; another troykauriously up, and then all eyes were turned on an approaching sleighn which the figures of the Emperor and Volkonski could already beescried.
	From the habit of fifty years all this had a physically agitatingffect on the old general. He carefully and hastily felt himself allver, readjusted his hat, and pulling himself together drew himself upnd, at the very moment when the Emperor, having alighted from theleigh, lifted his eyes to him, handed him the report and beganpeaking in his smooth, ingratiating voice.
	The Emperor with a rapid glance scanned Kutuzov from head to foot,rowned for an instant, but immediately mastering himself went up tohe old man, extended his arms and embraced him. And this embrace too,wing to a long-standing impression related to his innermost feelings,ad its usual effect on Kutuzov and he gave a sob.
	The Emperor greeted the officers and the Semenov guard, and againressing the old man's hand went with him into the castle.
	When alone with the field marshal the Emperor expressed hisissatisfaction at the slowness of the pursuit and at the mistakesade at Krasnoe and the Berezina, and informed him of his intentionsor a future campaign abroad. Kutuzov made no rejoinder or remark. Theame submissive, expressionless look with which he had listened to themperor's commands on the field of Austerlitz seven years beforeettled on his face now.
	When Kutuzov came out of the study and with lowered head wasrossing the ballroom with his heavy waddling gait, he was arrested byomeone's voice saying:
	"Your Serene Highness!"
	Kutuzov raised his head and looked for a long while into the eyes ofount Tolstoy, who stood before him holding a silver salver on whichay a small object. Kutuzov seemed not to understand what was expectedf him.
	Suddenly he seemed to remember; a scarcely perceptible smile flashedcross his puffy face, and bowing low and respectfully he took thebject that lay on the salver. It was the Order of St. George of theirst Class.BK15|CH11
	CHAPTER XI
	Next day the field marshal gave a dinner and ball which themperor honored by his presence. Kutuzov had received the Order of St.eorge of the First Class and the Emperor showed him the highestonors, but everyone knew of the imperial dissatisfaction with him.he proprieties were observed and the Emperor was the first to sethat example, but everybody understood that the old man waslameworthy and good-for-nothing. When Kutuzov, conforming to a customf Catherine's day, ordered the standards that had been captured to beowered at the Emperor's feet on his entering the ballroom, themperor made a wry face and muttered something in which some peopleaught the words, "the old comedian."
	The Emperor's displeasure with Kutuzov was specially increased atilna by the fact that Kutuzov evidently could not or would notnderstand the importance of the coming campaign.
	When on the following morning the Emperor said to the officersssembled about him: "You have not only saved Russia, you have savedurope!" they all understood that the war was not ended.
	Kutuzov alone would not see this and openly expressed his opinionhat no fresh war could improve the position or add to the glory ofussia, but could only spoil and lower the glorious position thatussia had gained. He tried to prove to the Emperor thempossibility of levying fresh troops, spoke of the hardshipslready endured by the people, of the possibility of failure and soorth.
	This being the field marshal's frame of mind he was naturallyegarded as merely a hindrance and obstacle to the impending war.
	To avoid unpleasant encounters with the old man, the naturalethod was to do what had been done with him at Austerlitz and witharclay at the beginning of the Russian campaign- to transfer theuthority to the Emperor himself, thus cutting the ground from underhe commander in chief's feet without upsetting the old man bynforming him of the change.
	With this object his staff was gradually reconstructed and itseal strength removed and transferred to the Emperor. Toll,onovnitsyn, and Ermolov received fresh appointments. Everyone spokeoudly of the field marshal's great weakness and failing health.
	His health had to be bad for his place to be taken away and given tonother. And in fact his health was poor.
	So naturally, simply, and gradually- just as he had come from Turkeyo the Treasury in Petersburg to recruit the militia, and then tohe army when he was needed there- now when his part was played out,utuzov's place was taken by a new and necessary performer.
	The war 1812, besides its national significance dear to everyussian heart, was now to assume another, a European, significance.
	The movement of peoples from west to east was to be succeeded by aovement of peoples from east to west, and for this fresh warnother leader was necessary, having qualities and views differingrom Kutuzov's and animated by different motives.
	Alexander I was as necessary for the movement of the peoples fromast to west and for the refixing of national frontiers as Kutuzov hadeen for the salvation and glory of Russia.
	Kutuzov did not understand what Europe, the balance of power, orapoleon meant. He could not understand it. For the representativef the Russian people, after the enemy had been destroyed and Russiaad been liberated and raised to the summit of her glory, there wasothing left to do as a Russian. Nothing remained for theepresentative of the national war but to die, and Kutuzov died.BK15|CH12
	CHAPTER XII
	As generally happens, Pierre did not feel the full effects of thehysical privation and strain he had suffered as prisoner untilfter they were over. After his liberation he reached Orel, and on thehird day there, when preparing to go to Kiev, he fell ill and wasaid up for three months. He had what the doctors termed "biliousever." But despite the fact that the doctors treated him, bled him,nd gave him medicines to drink, he recovered.
	Scarcely any impression was left on Pierre's mind by all thatappened to him from the time of his rescue till his illness. Heemembered only the dull gray weather now rainy and now snowy,nternal physical distress, and pains in his feet and side. Heemembered a general impression of the misfortunes and sufferings ofeople and of being worried by the curiosity of officers andenerals who questioned him, he also remembered his difficulty inrocuring a conveyance and horses, and above all he remembered hisncapacity to think and feel all that time. On the day of his rescuee had seen the body of Petya Rostov. That same day he had learnedhat Prince Andrew, after surviving the battle of Borodino for morehan a month had recently died in the Rostovs' house at Yaroslavl, andenisov who told him this news also mentioned Helene's death,upposing that Pierre had heard of it long before. All this at theime seemed merely strange to Pierre: he felt he could not grasp itsignificance. Just then he was only anxious to get away as quicklys possible from places where people were killing one another, to someeaceful refuge where he could recover himself, rest, and think overll the strange new facts he had learned; but on reaching Orel hemmediately fell ill. When he came to himself after his illness he sawn attendance on him two of his servants, Terenty and Vaska, who hadome from Moscow; and also his cousin the eldest princess, who hadeen living on his estate at Elets and hearing of his rescue andllness had come to look after him.
	It was only gradually during his convalescence that Pierre losthe impressions he had become accustomed to during the last few monthsnd got used to the idea that no one would oblige him to go anywhereomorrow, that no one would deprive him of his warm bed, and that heould be sure to get his dinner, tea, and supper. But for a longime in his dreams he still saw himself in the conditions ofaptivity. In the same way little by little he came to understandhe news he had been told after his rescue, about the death ofrince Andrew, the death of his wife, and the destruction of therench.
	A joyous feeling of freedom- that complete inalienable freedomatural to man which he had first experienced at the first haltutside Moscow- filled Pierre's soul during his convalescence. Heas surprised to find that this inner freedom, which was independentf external conditions, now had as it were an additional setting ofxternal liberty. He was alone in a strange town, withoutcquaintances. No one demanded anything of him or sent him anywhere.e had all he wanted: the thought of his wife which had been aontinual torment to him was no longer there, since she was no more.
	"Oh, how good! How splendid!" said he to himself when a cleanly laidable was moved up to him with savory beef tea, or when he lay downor the night on a soft clean bed, or when he remembered that therench had gone and that his wife was no more. "Oh, how good, howplendid!"
	And by old habit he asked himself the question: "Well, and whathen? What am I going to do?" And he immediately gave himself thenswer: "Well, I shall live. Ah, how splendid!"
	The very question that had formerly tormented him, the thing head continually sought to find- the aim of life- no longer existed forim now. That search for the aim of life had not merely disappearedemporarily- he felt that it no longer existed for him and could notresent itself again. And this very absence of an aim gave him theomplete, joyous sense of freedom which constituted his happiness athis time.
	He could not see an aim, for he now had faith- not faith in any kindf rule, or words, or ideas, but faith in an ever-living,ver-manifest God. Formerly he had sought Him in aims he setimself. That search for an aim had been simply a search for God,nd suddenly in his captivity he had learned not by words or reasoningut by direct feeling what his nurse had told him long ago: that Gods here and everywhere. In his captivity he had learned that inarataev God was greater, more infinite and unfathomable than in therchitect of the Universe recognized by the Freemasons. He felt like aan who after straining his eyes to see into the far distance findshat he sought at his very feet. All his life he had looked over theeads of the men around him, when he should have merely looked inront of him without straining his eyes.
	In the past he had never been able to find that great inscrutablenfinite something. He had only felt that it must exist somewherend had looked for it. In everything near and comprehensible he hadnly what was limited, petty, commonplace, and senseless. He hadquipped himself with a mental telescope and looked into remote space,here petty worldliness hiding itself in misty distance had seemedo him great and infinite merely because it was not clearly seen.nd such had European life, politics, Freemasonry, philosophy, andhilanthropy seemed to him. But even then, at moments of weakness ase had accounted them, his mind had penetrated to those distancesnd he had there seen the same pettiness, worldliness, andenselessness. Now, however, he had learned to see the great, eternal,nd infinite in everything, and therefore- to see it and enjoy itsontemplation- he naturally threw away the telescope through whiche had till now gazed over men's heads, and gladly regarded thever-changing, eternally great, unfathomable, and infinite life aroundim. And the closer he looked the more tranquil and happy he became.hat dreadful question, "What for?" which had formerly destroyed allis mental edifices, no longer existed for him. To that question,What for?" a simple answer was now always ready in his soul: "Becausehere is a God, that God without whose will not one hair falls from man's head."BK15|CH13
	CHAPTER XIII
	In external ways Pierre had hardly changed at all. In appearancee was just what he used to be. As before he was absent-minded andeemed occupied not with what was before his eyes but with somethingpecial of his own. The difference between his former and present selfas that formerly when he did not grasp what lay before him or wasaid to him, he had puckered his forehead painfully as if vainlyeeking to distinguish something at a distance. At present he stillorgot what was said to him and still did not see what was beforeis eyes, but he now looked with a scarcely perceptible andeemingly ironic smile at what was before him and listened to what wasaid, though evidently seeing and hearing something quite different.ormerly he had appeared to be a kindhearted but unhappy man, and soeople had been inclined to avoid him. Now a smile at the joy ofife always played round his lips, and sympathy for others, shone inis eyes with a questioning look as to whether they were asontented as he was, and people felt pleased by his presence.
	Previously he had talked a great deal, grew excited when healked, and seldom listened; now he was seldom carried away inonversation and knew how to listen so that people readily told himheir most intimate secrets.
	The princess, who had never liked Pierre and had been particularlyostile to him since she had felt herself under obligations to himfter the old count's death, now after staying a short time in Orel-here she had come intending to show Pierre that in spite of hisngratitude she considered it her duty to nurse him- felt to herurprise and vexation that she had become fond of him. Pierre didot in any way seek her approval, he merely studied her with interest.ormerly she had felt that he regarded her with indifference androny, and so had shrunk into herself as she did with others and hadhown him only the combative side of her nature; but now he seemedo be trying to understand the most intimate places of her heart, and,istrustfully at first but afterwards gratefully, she let him seehe hidden, kindly sides of her character.
	The most cunning man could not have crept into her confidence moreuccessfully, evoking memories of the best times of her youth andhowing sympathy with them. Yet Pierre's cunning consisted simply ininding pleasure in drawing out the human qualities of the embittered,ard, and (in her own way) proud princess.
	"Yes, he is a very, very kind man when he is not under the influencef bad people but of people such as myself," thought she.
	His servants too- Terenty and Vaska- in their own way noticed thehange that had taken place in Pierre. They considered that he hadecome much "simpler." Terenty, when he had helped him undress andished him good night, often lingered with his master's boots in hisands and clothes over his arm, to see whether he would not start aalk. And Pierre, noticing that Terenty wanted a chat, generallyept him there.
	"Well, tell me... now, how did you get food?" he would ask.
	And Terenty would begin talking of the destruction of Moscow, and ofhe old count, and would stand for a long time holding the clothes andalking, or sometimes listening to Pierre's stories, and then would gout into the hall with a pleasant sense of intimacy with his masternd affection for him.
	The doctor who attended Pierre and visited him every day, thoughe considered it his duty as a doctor to pose as a man whose everyoment was of value to suffering humanity, would sit for hours withierre telling him his favorite anecdotes and his observations onhe characters of his patients in general, and especially of theadies.
	"It's a pleasure to talk to a man like that; he is not like ourrovincials," he would say.
	There were several prisoners from the French army in Orel, and theoctor brought one of them, a young Italian, to see Pierre.
	This officer began visiting Pierre, and the princess used to makeun of the tenderness the Italian expressed for him.
	The Italian seemed happy only when he could come to see Pierre, talkith him, tell him about his past, his life at home, and his love, andour out to him his indignation against the French and especiallygainst Napoleon.
	"If all Russians are in the least like you, it is sacrilege to fightuch a nation," he said to Pierre. "You, who have suffered so from therench, do not even feel animosity toward them."
	Pierre had evoked the passionate affection of the Italian merelyy evoking the best side of his nature and taking a pleasure in sooing.
	During the last days of Pierre's stay in Orel his old Masoniccquaintance Count Willarski, who had introduced him to the lodge in807, came to see him. Willarski was married to a Russian heiressho had a large estate in Orel province, and he occupied a temporaryost in the commissariat department in that town.
	Hearing that Bezukhov was in Orel, Willarski, though they hadever been intimate, came to him with the professions of friendshipnd intimacy that people who meet in a desert generally express forne another. Willarski felt dull in Orel and was pleased to meet a manf his own circle and, as he supposed, of similar interests.
	But to his surprise Willarski soon noticed that Pierre had laggeduch behind the times, and had sunk, as he expressed it to himself,nto apathy and egotism.
	"You are letting yourself go, my dear fellow," he said.
	But for all that Willarski found it pleasanter now than it hadeen formerly to be with Pierre, and came to see him every day. Toierre as he looked at and listened to Willarski, it seemed strange tohink that he had been like that himself but a short time before.
	Willarski was a married man with a family, busy with his familyffairs, his wife's affairs, and his official duties. He regardedll these occupations as hindrances to life, and considered thathey were all contemptible because their aim was the welfare ofimself and his family. Military, administrative, political, andasonic interests continually absorbed his attention. And Pierre,ithout trying to change the other's views and without condemning him,ut with the quiet, joyful, and amused smile now habitual to him,as interested in this strange though very familiar phenomenon.
	There was a new feature in Pierre's relations with Willarski, withhe princess, with the doctor, and with all the people he now met,hich gained for him the general good will. This was hiscknowledgment of the impossibility of changing a man's convictions byords, and his recognition of the possibility of everyone thinking,eeling, and seeing things each from his own point of view. Thisegitimate peculiarity of each individual which used to excite andrritate Pierre now became a basis of the sympathy he felt for, andhe interest he took in, other people. The difference, and sometimesomplete contradiction, between men's opinions and their lives, andetween one man and another, pleased him and drew from him an amusednd gentle smile.
	In practical matters Pierre unexpectedly felt within himself aenter of gravity he had previously lacked. Formerly all pecuniaryuestions, especially requests for money to which, as an extremelyealthy man, he was very exposed, produced in him a state ofopeless agitation and perplexity. "To give or not to give?" he hadsked himself. "I have it and he needs it. But someone else needs ittill more. Who needs it most? And perhaps they are both impostors?"n the old days he had been unable to find a way out of all theseurmises and had given to all who asked as long as he had anythingo give. Formerly he had been in a similar state of perplexity withegard to every question concerning his property, when one persondvised one thing and another something else.
	Now to his surprise he found that he no longer felt either doubtr perplexity about these questions. There was now within him audge who by some rule unknown to him decided what should or shouldot be done.
	He was as indifferent as heretofore to money matters, but now heelt certain of what ought and what ought not to be done. The firstime he had recourse to his new judge was when a French prisoner, aolonel, came to him and, after talking a great deal about hisxploits, concluded by making what amounted to a demand that Pierrehould give him four thousand francs to send to his wife and children.ierre refused without the least difficulty or effort, and wasfterwards surprised how simple and easy had been what used toppear so insurmountably difficult. At the same time that he refusedhe colonel's demand he made up his mind that he must have recourse tortifice when leaving Orel, to induce the Italian officer to acceptome money of which he was evidently in need. A further proof toierre of his own more settled outlook on practical matters wasurnished by his decision with regard to his wife's debts and to theebuilding of his houses in and near Moscow.
	His head steward came to him at Orel and Pierre reckoned up with himis diminished income. The burning of Moscow had cost him, accordingo the head steward's calculation, about two million rubles.
	To console Pierre for these losses the head steward gave him anstimate showing that despite these losses his income would not beiminished but would even be increased if he refused to pay his wife'sebts which he was under no obligation to meet, and did not rebuildis Moscow house and the country house on his Moscow estate, which hadost him eighty thousand rubles a year and brought in nothing.
	"Yes, of course that's true," said Pierre with a cheerful smile.I don't need all that at all. By being ruined I have become muchicher."
	But in January Savelich came from Moscow and gave him an accountf the state of things there, and spoke of the estimate an architectad made of the cost of rebuilding the town and country houses,peaking of this as of a settled matter. About the same time heeceived letters from Prince Vasili and other Petersburg acquaintancespeaking of his wife's debts. And Pierre decided that the steward'sroposals which had so pleased him were wrong and that he must go toetersburg and settle his wife's affairs and must rebuild in Moscow.hy this was necessary he did not know, but he knew for certain thatt was necessary. His income would be reduced by three fourths, but heelt it must be done.
	Willarski was going to Moscow and they agreed to travel together.
	During the whole time of his convalescence in Orel Pierre hadxperienced a feeling of joy, freedom, and life; but when during hisourney he found himself in the open world and saw hundreds of newaces, that feeling was intensified. Throughout his journey he feltike a schoolboy on holiday. Everyone- the stagecoach driver, theost-house overseers, the peasants on the roads and in the villages-ad a new significance for him. The presence and remarks ofillarski who continually deplored the ignorance and poverty of Russiand its backwardness compared with Europe only heightened Pierre'sleasure. Where Willarski saw deadness Pierre saw an extraordinarytrength and vitality- the strength which in that vast space amidhe snows maintained the life of this original, peculiar, and uniqueeople. He did not contradict Willarski and even seemed to agreeith him- an apparent agreement being the simplest way to avoidiscussions that could lead to nothing- and he smiled joyfully as heistened to him.BK15|CH14
	CHAPTER XIV
	It would be difficult to explain why and whither ants whose heap haseen destroyed are hurrying: some from the heap dragging bits ofubbish, larvae, and corpses, others back to the heap, or why theyostle, overtake one another, and fight, and it would be equallyifficult to explain what caused the Russians after the departure ofhe French to throng to the place that had formerly been Moscow. Buthen we watch the ants round their ruined heap, the tenacity,nergy, and immense number of the delving insects prove that despitehe destruction of the heap, something indestructible, which thoughntangible is the real strength of the colony, still exists; andimilarly, though in Moscow in the month of October there was noovernment no churches, shrines, riches, or houses- it was still theoscow it had been in August. All was destroyed, except somethingntangible yet powerful and indestructible.
	The motives of those who thronged from all sides to Moscow aftert had been cleared of the enemy were most diverse and personal, andt first for the most part savage and brutal. One motive only they allad in common: a desire to get to the place that had been calledoscow, to apply their activities there.
	Within a week Moscow already had fifteen thousand inhabitants, in fortnight twenty-five thousand, and so on. By the autumn of 1813 theumber, ever increasing and increasing, exceeded what it had been in812.
	The first Russians to enter Moscow were the Cossacks ofintzingerode's detachment, peasants from the adjacent villages, andesidents who had fled from Moscow and had been hiding in itsicinity. The Russians who entered Moscow, finding it plundered,lundered it in their turn. They continued what the French hadegun. Trains of peasant carts came to Moscow to carry off to theillages what had been abandoned in the ruined houses and the streets.he Cossacks carried off what they could to their camps, and theouseholders seized all they could find in other houses and moved ito their own, pretending that it was their property.
	But the first plunderers were followed by a second and a thirdontingent, and with increasing numbers plundering became more andore difficult and assumed more definite forms.
	The French found Moscow abandoned but with all the organizationsf regular life, with diverse branches of commerce andraftsmanship, with luxury, and governmental and religiousnstitutions. These forms were lifeless but still existed. Thereere bazaars, shops, warehouses, market stalls, granaries- for theost part still stocked with goods- and there were factories andorkshops, palaces and wealthy houses filled with luxuries, hospitals,risons, government offices, churches, and cathedrals. The longerhe French remained the more these forms of town life perished,ntil finally all was merged into one confused, lifeless scene oflunder.
	The more the plundering by the French continued, the more both theealth of Moscow and the strength of its plunderers was destroyed. Butlundering by the Russians, with which the reoccupation of the cityegan, had an opposite effect: the longer it continued and the greaterhe number of people taking part in it the more rapidly was the wealthf the city and its regular life restored.
	Besides the plunderers, very various people, some drawn byuriosity, some by official duties, some by self-interest- housewners, clergy, officials of all kinds, tradesmen, artisans, andeasants- streamed into Moscow as blood flows to the heart.
	Within a week the peasants who came with empty carts to carry offlunder were stopped by the authorities and made to cart the corpsesut of the town. Other peasants, having heard of their comrades'iscomfiture, came to town bringing rye, oats, and hay, and beatown one another's prices to below what they had been in formerays. Gangs of carpenters hoping for high pay arrived in Moscowvery day, and on all sides logs were being hewn, new houses built,nd old, charred ones repaired. Tradesmen began trading in booths.ookshops and taverns were opened in partially burned houses. Thelergy resumed the services in many churches that had not been burned.onors contributed Church property that had been stolen. Governmentlerks set up their baize-covered tables and their pigeonholes ofocuments in small rooms. The higher authorities and the policerganized the distribution of goods left behind by the French. Thewners of houses in which much property had been left, brought thererom other houses, complained of the injustice of taking everything tohe Faceted Palace in the Kremlin; others insisted that as therench had gathered things from different houses into this or thatouse, it would be unfair to allow its owner to keep all that wasound there. They abused the police and bribed them, made outstimates at ten times their value for government stores that haderished in the fire, and demanded relief. And Count Rostopchinrote proclamations.BK15|CH15
	CHAPTER XV
	At the end of January Pierre went to Moscow and stayed in an annexf his house which had not been burned. He called on Countostopchin and on some acquaintances who were back in Moscow, and hentended to leave for Petersburg two days later. Everybody waselebrating the victory, everything was bubbling with life in theuined but reviving city. Everyone was pleased to see Pierre, everyoneished to meet him, and everyone questioned him about what he hadeen. Pierre felt particularly well disposed toward them all, butas now instinctively on his guard for fear of binding himself inny way. To all questions put to him- whether important or quiterifling- such as: Where would he live? Was he going to rebuild?hen was he going to Petersburg and would he mind taking a parcelor someone?- he replied: "Yes, perhaps," or, "I think so," and so on.
	He had heard that the Rostovs were at Kostroma but the thought ofatasha seldom occurred to him. If it did it was only as a pleasantemory of the distant past. He felt himself not only free fromocial obligations but also from that feeling which, it seemed to him,e had aroused in himself.
	On the third day after his arrival he heard from the Drubetskoyshat Princess Mary was in Moscow. The death, sufferings, and last daysf Prince Andrew had often occupied Pierre's thoughts and now recurredo him with fresh vividness. Having heard at dinner that Princess Maryas in Moscow and living in her house- which had not been burned- inozdvizhenka Street, he drove that same evening to see her.
	On his way to the house Pierre kept thinking of Prince Andrew, ofheir friendship, of his various meetings with him, and especiallyf the last one at Borodino.
	"Is it possible that he died in the bitter frame of mind he was thenn? Is it possible that the meaning of life was not disclosed to himefore he died?" thought Pierre. He recalled Karataev and his deathnd involuntarily began to compare these two men, so different, andet so similar in that they had both lived and both died and in theove he felt for both of them.
	Pierre drove up to the house of the old prince in a most seriousood. The house had escaped the fire; it showed signs of damage butts general aspect was unchanged. The old footman, who met Pierre with stern face as if wishing to make the visitor feel that the absencef the old prince had not disturbed the order of things in theouse, informed him that the princess had gone to her ownpartments, and that she received on Sundays.
	"Announce me. Perhaps she will see me," said Pierre.
	"Yes, sir," said the man. "Please step into the portrait gallery."
	A few minutes later the footman returned with Dessalles, who broughtord from the princess that she would be very glad to see Pierre if heould excuse her want of ceremony and come upstairs to her apartment.
	In a rather low room lit by one candle sat the princess and with hernother person dressed in black. Pierre remembered that the princesslways had lady companions, but who they were and what they wereike he never knew or remembered. "This must be one of herompanions," he thought, glancing at the lady in the black dress.
	The princess rose quickly to meet him and held out her hand.
	"Yes," she said, looking at his altered face after he had kissed herand, "so this is how we meet again. He of spoke of you even at theery last," she went on, turning her eyes from Pierre to her companionith a shyness that surprised him for an instant.
	"I was so glad to hear of your safety. It was the first piece ofood news we had received for a long time."
	Again the princess glanced round at her companion with even moreneasiness in her manner and was about to add something, but Pierrenterrupted her.
	"Just imagine- I knew nothing about him!" said he. "I thought he hadeen killed. All I know I heard at second hand from others. I onlynow that he fell in with the Rostovs.... What a strange coincidence!"
	Pierre spoke rapidly and with animation. He glanced once at theompanion's face, saw her attentive and kindly gaze fixed on him, and,s often happens when one is talking, felt somehow that this companionn the black dress was a good, kind, excellent creature who wouldot hinder his conversing freely with Princess Mary.
	But when he mentioned the Rostovs, Princess Mary's face expressedtill greater embarrassment. She again glanced rapidly from Pierre'sace to that of the lady in the black dress and said:
	"Do you really not recognize her?"
	Pierre looked again at the companion's pale, delicate face withts black eyes and peculiar mouth, and something near to him, longorgotten and more than sweet, looked at him from those attentiveyes.
	"But no, it can't be!" he thought. "This stern, thin, pale face thatooks so much older! It cannot be she. It merely reminds me of her."ut at that moment Princess Mary said, "Natasha!" And with difficulty,ffort, and stress, like the opening of a door grown rusty on itsinges, a smile appeared on the face with the attentive eyes, and fromhat opening door came a breath of fragrance which suffused Pierreith a happiness he had long forgotten and of which he had not eveneen thinking- especially at that moment. It suffused him, seized him,nd enveloped him completely. When she smiled doubt was no longerossible, it was Natasha and he loved her.
	At that moment Pierre involuntarily betrayed to her, to Princessary, and above all to himself, a secret of which he himself hadeen unaware. He flushed joyfully yet with painful distress. Heried to hide his agitation. But the more he tried to hide it the morelearly- clearer than any words could have done- did he betray toimself, to her, and to Princess Mary that he loved her.
	"No, it's only the unexpectedness of it," thought Pierre. But asoon as he tried to continue the conversation he had begun withrincess Mary he again glanced at Natasha, and a still-deeper flushuffused his face and a still-stronger agitation of mingled joy andear seized his soul. He became confused in his speech and stoppedn the middle of what he was saying.
	Pierre had failed to notice Natasha because he did not at all expecto see her there, but he had failed to recognize her because thehange in her since he last saw her was immense. She had grown thinnd pale, but that was not what made her unrecognizable; she wasnrecognizable at the moment he entered because on that face whoseyes had always shone with a suppressed smile of the joy of life,ow when he first entered and glanced at her there was not the leasthadow of a smile: only her eyes were kindly attentive and sadlynterrogative.
	Pierre's confusion was not reflected by any confusion on Natasha'sart, but only by the pleasure that just perceptibly lit up herhole face.BK15|CH16
	CHAPTER XVI
	"She has come to stay with me," said Princess Mary. "The count andountess will be here in a few days. The countess is in a dreadfultate; but it was necessary for Natasha herself to see a doctor.hey insisted on her coming with me."
	"Yes, is there a family free from sorrow now?" said Pierre,ddressing Natasha. "You know it happened the very day we wereescued. I saw him. What a delightful boy he was!"
	Natasha looked at him, and by way of answer to his words her eyesidened and lit up.
	"What can one say or think of as a consolation?" said Pierre.Nothing! Why had such a splendid boy, so full of life, to die?"
	"Yes, in these days it would be hard to live without faith..."emarked Princess Mary.
	"Yes, yes, that is really true," Pierre hastily interrupted her.
	"Why is it true?" Natasha asked, looking attentively into Pierre'syes.
	"How can you ask why?" said Princess Mary. "The thought alone ofhat awaits..."
	Natasha without waiting for Princess Mary to finish again lookednquiringly at Pierre.
	"And because," Pierre continued, "only one who believes that theres a God ruling us can bear a loss such as hers and... yours."
	Natasha had already opened her mouth to speak but suddenlytopped. Pierre hurriedly turned away from her and again addressedrincess Mary, asking about his friend's last days.
	Pierre's confusion had now almost vanished, but at the same timee felt that his freedom had also completely gone. He felt thathere was now a judge of his every word and action whose judgmentattered more to him than that of all the rest of the world. As hepoke now he was considering what impression his words would make onatasha. He did not purposely say things to please her, but whatevere was saying he regarded from her standpoint.
	Princess Mary- reluctantly as is usual in such cases- beganelling of the condition in which she had found Prince Andrew. Butierre's face quivering with emotion, his questions and his eagerestless expression, gradually compelled her to go into detailshich she feared to recall for her own sake.
	"Yes, yes, and so...? " Pierre kept saying as he leaned toward herith his whole body and eagerly listened to her story. "Yes, yes... soe grew tranquil and softened? With all his soul he had alwaysought one thing- to be perfectly good- so he could not be afraid ofeath. The faults he had- if he had any- were not of his making. So heid soften?... What a happy thing that he saw you again," he added,uddenly turning to Natasha and looking at her with eyes full ofears.
	Natasha's face twitched. She frowned and lowered her eyes for aoment. She hesitated for an instant whether to speak or not.
	"Yes, that was happiness," she then said in her quiet voice with itseep chest notes. "For me it certainly was happiness." She paused.And he... he... he said he was wishing for it at the very moment Intered the room...."
	Natasha's voice broke. She blushed, pressed her clasped hands on hernees, and then controlling herself with an evident effort lifteder head and began to speak rapidly.
	"We knew nothing of it when we started from Moscow. I did not dareo ask about him. Then suddenly Sonya told me he was traveling withs. I had no idea and could not imagine what state he was in, all Ianted was to see him and be with him," she said, trembling, andreathing quickly.
	And not letting them interrupt her she went on to tell what shead never yet mentioned to anyone- all she had lived through duringhose three weeks of their journey and life at Yaroslavl.
	Pierre listened to her with lips parted and eyes fixed upon her fullf tears. As he listened he did not think of Prince Andrew, nor ofeath, nor of what she was telling. He listened to her and felt onlyity for her, for what she was suffering now while she was speaking.
	Princess Mary, frowning in her effort to hold back her tears, sateside Natasha, and heard for the first time the story of those lastays of her brother's and Natasha's love.
	Evidently Natasha needed to tell that painful yet joyful tale.
	She spoke, mingling most trifling details with the intimateecrets of her soul, and it seemed as if she could never finish.everal times she repeated the same thing twice.
	Dessalles' voice was heard outside the door asking whether littleicholas might come in to say good night.
	"Well, that's all- everything," said Natasha.
	She got up quickly just as Nicholas entered, almost ran to theoor which was hidden by curtains, struck her head against it, andushed from the room with a moan either of pain or sorrow.
	Pierre gazed at the door through which she had disappeared and didot understand why he suddenly felt all alone in the world.
	Princess Mary roused him from his abstraction by drawing histtention to her nephew who had entered the room.
	At that moment of emotional tenderness young Nicholas' face, whichesembled his father's, affected Pierre so much that when he hadissed the boy he got up quickly, took out his handkerchief, andent to the window. He wished to take leave of Princess Mary, buthe would not let him go.
	"No, Natasha and I sometimes don't go to sleep till after two, solease don't go. I will order supper. Go downstairs, we will comemmediately."
	Before Pierre left the room Princess Mary told him: "This is theirst time she has talked of him like that."BK15|CH17
	CHAPTER XVII
	Pierre was shown into the large, brightly lit dining room; a fewinutes later he heard footsteps and Princess Mary entered withatasha. Natasha was calm, though a severe and grave expression hadgain settled on her face. They all three of them now experienced thateeling of awkwardness which usually follows after a serious andeartfelt talk. It is impossible to go back to the sameonversation, to talk of trifles is awkward, and yet the desire topeak is there and silence seems like affectation. They wentilently to table. The footmen drew back the chairs and pushed them upgain. Pierre unfolded his cold table napkin and, resolving to breakhe silence, looked at Natasha and at Princess Mary. They hadvidently both formed the same resolution; the eyes of both shone withatisfaction and a confession that besides sorrow life also has joy.
	"Do you take vodka, Count?" asked Princess Mary, and those wordsuddenly banished the shadows of the past. "Now tell us aboutourself," said she. "One hears such improbable wonders about you."
	"Yes," replied Pierre with the smile of mild irony now habitual toim. "They even tell me wonders I myself never dreamed of! Marybramovna invited me to her house and kept telling me what hadappened, or ought to have happened, to me. Stepan Stepanych alsonstructed me how I ought to tell of my experiences. In general I haveoticed that it is very easy to be an interesting man (I am annteresting man now); people invite me out and tell me all aboutyself."
	Natasha smiled and was on the point of speaking.
	"We have been told," Princess Mary interrupted her, "that you lostwo millions in Moscow. Is that true?"
	"But I am three times as rich as before," returned Pierre.
	Though the position was now altered by his decision to pay hisife's debts and to rebuild his houses, Pierre still maintained thate had become three times as rich as before.
	"What I have certainly gained is freedom," he began seriously, butid not continue, noticing that this theme was too egotistic.
	"And are you building?"
	"Yes. Savelich says I must!"
	"Tell me, you did not know of the countess' death when you decidedo remain in Moscow?" asked Princess Mary and immediately blushed,oticing that her question, following his mention of freedom, ascribedo his words a meaning he had perhaps not intended.
	"No," answered Pierre, evidently not considering awkward the meaningrincess Mary had given to his words. "I heard of it in Orel and youannot imagine how it shocked me. We were not an exemplary couple," hedded quickly, glancing at Natasha and noticing on her faceuriosity as to how he would speak of his wife, "but her death shockede terribly. When two people quarrel they are always both in fault,nd one's own guilt suddenly becomes terribly serious when the others no longer alive. And then such a death... without friends andithout consolation! I am very, very sorry for her," he concluded, andas pleased to notice a look of glad approval on Natasha's face.
	"Yes, and so you are once more an eligible bachelor," saidrincess Mary.
	Pierre suddenly flushed crimson and for a long time tried not toook at Natasha. When he ventured to glance her way again her face wasold, stern, and he fancied even contemptuous.
	"And did you really see and speak to Napoleon, as we have beenold?" said Princess Mary.
	Pierre laughed.
	"No, not once! Everybody seems to imagine that being takenrisoner means being Napoleon's guest. Not only did I never see himut I heard nothing about him- I was in much lower company!"
	Supper was over, and Pierre who at first declined to speak about hisaptivity was gradually led on to do so.
	"But it's true that you remained in Moscow to kill Napoleon?"atasha asked with a slight smile. "I guessed it then when we met athe Sukharev tower, do you remember?"
	Pierre admitted that it was true, and from that was gradually led byrincess Mary's questions and especially by Natasha's into giving aetailed account of his adventures.
	At first he spoke with the amused and mild irony now customaryith him toward everybody and especially toward himself, but when heame to describe the horrors and sufferings he had witnessed he wasnconsciously carried away and began speaking with the suppressedmotion of a man re-experiencing in recollection strong impressions heas lived through.
	Princess Mary with a gentle smile looked now at Pierre and now atatasha. In the whole narrative she saw only Pierre and hisoodness. Natasha, leaning on her elbow, the expression of her faceonstantly changing with the narrative, watched Pierre with anttention that never wandered- evidently herself experiencing all thate described. Not only her look, but her exclamations and the briefuestions she put, showed Pierre that she understood just what heished to convey. It was clear that she understood not only what heaid but also what he wished to, but could not, express in words.he account Pierre gave of the incident with the child and the womanor protecting whom he was arrested was this: "It was an awfulight- children abandoned, some in the flames... One was snatchedut before my eyes... and there were women who had their thingsnatched off and their earrings torn out..." he flushed and grewonfused. "Then a patrol arrived and all the men- all those who wereot looting, that is- were arrested, and I among them."
	"I am sure you're not telling us everything; I am sure you didomething..." said Natasha and pausing added, "something fine?"
	Pierre continued. When he spoke of the execution he wanted to passver the horrible details, but Natasha insisted that he should notmit anything.
	Pierre began to tell about Karataev, but paused. By this time he hadisen from the table and was pacing the room, Natasha following himith her eyes. Then he added:
	"No, you can't understand what I learned from that illiterate man-hat simple fellow."
	"Yes, yes, go on!" said Natasha. "Where is he?"
	"They killed him almost before my eyes."
	And Pierre, his voice trembling continually, went on to tell ofhe last days of their retreat, of Karataev's illness and his death.
	He told of his adventures as he had never yet recalled them. He now,s it were, saw a new meaning in all he had gone through. Now thate was telling it all to Natasha he experienced that pleasure which man has when women listen to him- not clever women who whenistening either try to remember what they hear to enrich theirinds and when opportunity offers to retell it, or who wish to adoptt to some thought of their own and promptly contribute their ownlever comments prepared in their little mental workshop- but theleasure given by real women gifted with a capacity to select andbsorb the very best a man shows of himself. Natasha without knowingt was all attention: she did not lose a word, no single quiver inierre's voice, no look, no twitch of a muscle in his face, nor aingle gesture. She caught the unfinished word in its flight andook it straight into her open heart, divining the secret meaning ofll Pierre's mental travail.
	Princess Mary understood his story and sympathized with him, but sheow saw something else that absorbed all her attention. She saw theossibility of love and happiness between Natasha and Pierre, andhe first thought of this filled her heart with gladness.
	It was three o'clock in the morning. The footmen came in with sadnd stern faces to change the candles, but no one noticed them.
	Pierre finished his story. Natasha continued to look at him intentlyith bright, attentive, and animated eyes, as if trying tonderstand something more which he had perhaps left untold. Pierren shamefaced and happy confusion glanced occasionally at her, andried to think what to say next to introduce a fresh subject. Princessary was silent. It occurred to none of them that it was three o'clocknd time to go to bed.
	"People speak of misfortunes and sufferings," remarked Pierre,but if at this moment I were asked: 'Would you rather be what youere before you were taken prisoner, or go through all this again?'hen for heaven's sake let me again have captivity and horseflesh!e imagine that when we are thrown out of our usual ruts all isost, but it is only then that what is new and good begins. Whilehere is life there is happiness. There is much, much before us. I sayhis to you," he added, turning to Natasha.
	"Yes, yes," she said, answering something quite different. "I toohould wish nothing but to relive it all from the beginning."
	Pierre looked intently at her.
	"Yes, and nothing more." said Natasha.
	"It's not true, not true!" cried Pierre. "I am not to blame foreing alive and wishing to live- nor you either."
	Suddenly Natasha bent her head, covered her face with her hands, andegan to cry.
	"What is it, Natasha?" said Princess Mary.
	"Nothing, nothing." She smiled at Pierre through her tears. "Goodight! It is time for bed."
	Pierre rose and took his leave.
	Princess Mary and Natasha met as usual in the bedroom. They talkedf what Pierre had told them. Princess Mary did not express herpinion of Pierre nor did Natasha speak of him.
	"Well, good night, Mary!" said Natasha. "Do you know, I am oftenfraid that by not speaking of him" (she meant Prince Andrew) "forear of not doing justice to our feelings, we forget him."
	Princess Mary sighed deeply and thereby acknowledged the justicef Natasha's remark, but she did not express agreement in words.
	"Is it possible to forget?" said she.
	"It did me so much good to tell all about it today. It was hardnd painful, but good, very good!" said Natasha. "I am sure heeally loved him. That is why I told him... Was it all right?" shedded, suddenly blushing.
	"To tell Pierre? Oh, yes. What a splendid man he is!" saidrincess Mary.
	"Do you know, Mary..." Natasha suddenly said with a mischievousmile such as Princess Mary had not seen on her face for a longime, "he has somehow grown so clean, smooth, and fresh- as if head just come out of a Russian bath; do you understand? Out of a moralath. Isn't it true?"
	"Yes," replied Princess Mary. "He has greatly improved."
	"With a short coat and his hair cropped; just as if, well, just asf he had come straight from the bath... Papa used to..."
	"I understand why he" (Prince Andrew) "liked no one so much as him,"aid Princess Mary.
	"Yes, and yet he is quite different. They say men are friends whenhey are quite different. That must be true. Really he is quite unlikeim- in everything."
	"Yes, but he's wonderful."
	"Well, good night," said Natasha.
	And the same mischievous smile lingered for a long time on herace as if it had been forgotten there.BK15|CH18
	CHAPTER XVIII
	It was a long time before Pierre could fall asleep that night. Heaced up and down his room, now turning his thoughts on a difficultroblem and frowning, now suddenly shrugging his shoulders andincing, and now smiling happily.
	He was thinking of Prince Andrew, of Natasha, and of their love,t one moment jealous of her past, then reproaching himself for thateeling. It was already six in the morning and he still paced up andown the room.
	"Well, what's to be done if it cannot be avoided? What's to be done?vidently it has to be so," said he to himself, and hastily undressinge got into bed, happy and agitated but free from hesitation orndecision.
	"Strange and impossible as such happiness seems, I must doverything that she and I may be man and wife," he told himself.
	A few days previously Pierre had decided to go to Petersburg onhe Friday. When he awoke on the Thursday, Savelich came to ask himbout packing for the journey.
	"What, to Petersburg? What is Petersburg? Who is there inetersburg?" he asked involuntarily, though only to himself. "Oh, yes,ong ago before this happened I did for some reason mean to go toetersburg," he reflected. "Why? But perhaps I shall go. What a goodellow he is and how attentive, and how he remembers everything," hehought, looking at Savelich's old face, "and what a pleasant smile heas!"
	"Well, Savelich, do you still not wish to accept your freedom?"ierre asked him.
	"What's the good of freedom to me, your excellency? We lived underhe late count- the kingdom of heaven be his!- and we have lived underou too, without ever being wronged."
	"And your children?"
	"The children will live just the same. With such masters one canive."
	"But what about my heirs?" said Pierre. "Supposing I suddenlyarry... it might happen," he added with an involuntary smile.
	"If I may take the liberty, your excellency, it would be a goodhing."
	"How easy he thinks it," thought Pierre. "He doesn't know howerrible it is and how dangerous. Too soon or too late... it iserrible!"
	"So what are your orders? Are you starting tomorrow?" askedavelich.
	"No, I'll put it off for a bit. I'll tell you later. You mustorgive the trouble I have put you to," said Pierre, and seeingavelich smile, he thought: "But how strange it is that he shouldot know that now there is no Petersburg for me, and that that must beettled first of all! But probably he knows it well enough and is onlyretending. Shall I have a talk with him and see what he thinks?"ierre reflected. "No, another time."
	At breakfast Pierre told the princess, his cousin, that he hadeen to see Princess Mary the day before and had there met- "Whom doou think? Natasha Rostova!"
	The princess seemed to see nothing more extraordinary in that thanf he had seen Anna Semenovna.
	"Do you know her?" asked Pierre.
	"I have seen the princess," she replied. "I heard that they wererranging a match for her with young Rostov. It would be a very goodhing for the Rostovs, they are said to be utterly ruined."
	"No; I mean do you know Natasha Rostova?"
	"I heard about that affair of hers at the time. It was a greatity."
	"No, she either doesn't understand or is pretending," thoughtierre. "Better not say anything to her either."
	The princess too had prepared provisions for Pierre's journey.
	"How kind they all are," thought Pierre. "What is surprising is thathey should trouble about these things now when it can no longer be ofnterest to them. And all for me!"
	On the same day the Chief of Police came to Pierre, inviting himo send a representative to the Faceted Palace to recover thingshat were to be returned to their owners that day.
	"And this man too," thought Pierre, looking into the face of thehief of Police. "What a fine, good-looking officer and how kind.ancy bothering about such trifies now! And they actually say he isot honest and takes bribes. What nonsense! Besides, why shouldn'te take bribes? That's the way he was brought up, and everybody doest. But what a kind, pleasant face and how he smiles as he looks ate."
	Pierre went to Princess Mary's to dinner.
	As he drove through the streets past the houses that had been burnedown, he was surprised by the beauty of those ruins. Theicturesqueness of the chimney stacks and tumble-down walls of theurned-out quarters of the town, stretching out and concealing onenother, reminded him of the Rhine and the Colosseum. The cabmen heet and their passengers, the carpenters cutting the timber for newouses with axes, the women hawkers, and the shopkeepers, all lookedt him with cheerful beaming eyes that seemed to say: "Ah, there hes! Let's see what will come of it!"
	At the entrance to Princess Mary's house Pierre felt doubtfulhether he had really been there the night before and really seenatasha and talked to her. "Perhaps I imagined it; perhaps I shallo in and find no one there." But he had hardly entered the roomefore he felt her presence with his whole being by the loss of hisense of freedom. She was in the same black dress with soft foldsnd her hair was done the same way as the day before, yet she wasuite different. Had she been like this when he entered the day beforee could not for a moment have failed to recognize her.
	She was as he had known her almost as a child and later on as Princendrew's fiancee. A bright questioning light shone in her eyes, and oner face was a friendly and strangely roguish expression.
	Pierre dined with them and would have spent the whole evening there,ut Princess Mary was going to vespers and Pierre left the houseith her.
	Next day he came early, dined, and stayed the whole evening.hough Princess Mary and Natasha were evidently glad to see theirisitor and though all Pierre's interest was now centered in thatouse, by the evening they had talked over everything and theonversation passed from one trivial topic to another and repeatedlyroke off. He stayed so long that Princess Mary and Natashaxchanged glances, evidently wondering when he would go. Pierreoticed this but could not go. He felt uneasy and embarrassed, but satn because he simply could not get up and take his leave.
	Princess Mary, foreseeing no end to this, rose first, andomplaining of a headache began to say good night.
	"So you are going to Petersburg tomorrow?" she asked.
	"No, I am not going," Pierre replied hastily, in a surprised tonend as though offended. "Yes... no... to Petersburg? Tomorrow- but Ion't say good-by yet. I will call round in case you have anyommissions for me," said he, standing before Princess Mary andurning red, but not taking his departure.
	Natasha gave him her hand and went out. Princess Mary on the otherand instead of going away sank into an armchair, and looked sternlynd intently at him with her deep, radiant eyes. The weariness she hadlainly shown before had now quite passed off. With a deep andong-drawn sigh she seemed to be prepared for a lengthy talk.
	When Natasha left the room Pierre's confusion and awkwardnessmmediately vanished and were replaced by eager excitement. He quicklyoved an armchair toward Princess Mary.
	"Yes, I wanted to tell you," said he, answering her look as if shead spoken. "Princess, help me! What am I to do? Can I hope? Princess,y dear friend, listen! I know it all. I know I am not worthy ofer, I know it's impossible to speak of it now. But I want to be arother to her. No, not that, I don't, I can't..."
	He paused and rubbed his face and eyes with his hands.
	"Well," he went on with an evident effort at self-control andoherence. "I don't know when I began to love her, but I have loveder and her alone all my life, and I love her so that I cannot imagineife without her. I cannot propose to her at present, but thehought that perhaps she might someday be my wife and that I may beissing that possibility... that possibility... is terrible. Telle, can I hope? Tell me what I am to do, dear princess!" he addedfter a pause, and touched her hand as she did not reply.
	"I am thinking of what you have told me," answered Princess Mary.This is what I will say. You are right that to speak to her of lovet present..."
	Princess Mary stopped. She was going to say that to speak of loveas impossible, but she stopped because she had seen by the suddenhange in Natasha two days before that she would not only not beurt if Pierre spoke of his love, but that it was the very thing sheished for.
	"To speak to her now wouldn't do," said the princess all the same.
	"But what am I to do?
	"Leave it to me," said Princess Mary. "I know..."
	Pierre was looking into Princess Mary's eyes.
	"Well?... Well?..." he said.
	"I know that she loves... will love you," Princess Mary correctederself.
	Before her words were out, Pierre had sprung up and with arightened expression seized Princess Mary's hand.
	"What makes you think so? You think I may hope? You think...?"
	"Yes, I think so," said Princess Mary with a smile. "Write to herarents, and leave it to me. I will tell her when I can. I wish ito happen and my heart tells me it will."
	"No, it cannot be! How happy I am! But it can't be.... How happy Im! No, it can't be!" Pierre kept saying as he kissed Princessary's hands.
	"Go to Petersburg, that will be best. And I will write to you,"he said.
	"To Petersburg? Go there? Very well, I'll go. But I may come againomorrow?"
	Next day Pierre came to say good-by. Natasha was less animatedhan she had been the day before; but that day as he looked at herierre sometimes felt as if he was vanishing and that neither he norhe existed any longer, that nothing existed but happiness. "Is itossible? No, it can't be," he told himself at every look, gesture,nd word that filled his soul with joy.
	When on saying good-by he took her thin, slender hand, he couldot help holding it a little longer in his own.
	"Is it possible that this hand, that face, those eyes, all thisreasure of feminine charm so strange to me now, is it possible thatt will one day be mine forever, as familiar to me as I am toyself?... No, that's impossible!..."
	"Good-by, Count," she said aloud. "I shall look forward very much toour return," she added in a whisper.
	And these simple words, her look, and the expression on her facehich accompanied them, formed for two months the subject ofnexhaustible memories, interpretations, and happy meditations forierre. "'I shall look forward very much to your return....' Yes, yes,ow did she say it? Yes, 'I shall look forward very much to youreturn.' Oh, how happy I am! What is happening to me? How happy I am!"aid Pierre to himself.BK15|CH19
	CHAPTER XIX
	There was nothing in Pierre's soul now at all like what had troubledt during his courtship of Helene.
	He did not repeat to himself with a sickening feeling of shame theords he had spoken, or say: "Oh, why did I not say that?" and,Whatever made me say 'Je vous aime'?" On the contrary, he nowepeated in imagination every word that he or Natasha had spoken andictured every detail of her face and smile, and did not wish toiminish or add anything, but only to repeat it again and again. Thereas now not a shadow of doubt in his mind as to whether what he hadndertaken was right or wrong. Only one terrible doubt sometimesrossed his mind: "Wasn't it all a dream? Isn't Princess Maryistaken? Am I not too conceited and self-confident? I believe allhis- and suddenly Princess Mary will tell her, and she will be sureo smile and say: 'How strange! He must be deluding himself. Doesn'te know that he is a man, just a man, while I...? I am somethingltogether different and higher.'"
	That was the only doubt often troubling Pierre. He did not nowake any plans. The happiness before him appeared so inconceivablehat if only he could attain it, it would be the end of all things.verything ended with that.
	A joyful, unexpected frenzy, of which he had thought himselfncapable, possessed him. The whole meaning of life- not for him aloneut for the whole world- seemed to him centered in his love and theossibility of being loved by her. At times everybody seemed to him toe occupied with one thing only- his future happiness. Sometimes iteemed to him that other people were all as pleased as he wasimself and merely tried to hide that pleasure by pretending to beusy with other interests. In every word and gesture he sawllusions to his happiness. He often surprised those he met by hisignificantly happy looks and smiles which seemed to express aecret understanding between him and them. And when he realized thateople might not be aware of his happiness, he pitied them with hishole heart and felt a desire somehow to explain to them that all thatccupied them was a mere frivolous trifle unworthy of attention.
	When it was suggested to him that he should enter the civil service,r when the war or any general political affairs were discussed on thessumption that everybody's welfare depended on this or that issuef events, he would listen with a mild and pitying smile andurprise people by his strange comments. But at this time he sawverybody- both those who, as he imagined, understood the real meaningf life (that is, what he was feeling) and those unfortunates whovidently did not understand it- in the bright light of the emotionhat shone within himself, and at once without any effort saw inveryone he met everything that was good and worthy of being loved.
	When dealing with the affairs and papers of his dead wife, heremory aroused in him no feeling but pity that she had not known theliss he now knew. Prince Vasili, who having obtained a new post andome fresh decorations was particularly proud at this time, seemedo him a pathetic, kindly old man much to be pitied.
	Often in afterlife Pierre recalled this period of blissful insanity.ll the views he formed of men and circumstances at this time remainedrue for him always. He not only did not renounce them subsequently,ut when he was in doubt or inwardly at variance, he referred to theiews he had held at this time of his madness and they always provedorrect.
	"I may have appeared strange and queer then," he thought, "but I wasot so mad as I seemed. On the contrary I was then wiser and hadore insight than at any other time, and understood all that isorth understanding in life, because... because I was happy."
	Pierre's insanity consisted in not waiting, as he used to do, toiscover personal attributes which he termed "good qualities" ineople before loving them; his heart was now overflowing with love,nd by loving people without cause he discovered indubitable causesor loving them.BK15|CH20
	CHAPTER XX
	After Pierre's departure that first evening, when Natasha had saido Princess Mary with a gaily mocking smile: "He looks just, yes, justs if he had come out of a Russian bath- in a short coat and withis hair cropped," something hidden and unknown to herself, butrrepressible, awoke in Natasha's soul.
	Everything: her face, walk, look, and voice, was suddenly altered.o her own surprise a power of life and hope of happiness rose tohe surface and demanded satisfaction. From that evening she seemed toave forgotten all that had happened to her. She no longeromplained of her position, did not say a word about the past, ando longer feared to make happy plans for the future. She spokeittle of Pierre, but when Princess Mary mentioned him aong-extinguished light once more kindled in her eyes and her lipsurved with a strange smile.
	The change that took place in Natasha at first surprised Princessary; but when she understood its meaning it grieved her. "Can sheave loved my brother so little as to be able to forget him sooon?" she thought when she reflected on the change. But when sheas with Natasha she was not vexed with her and did not reproacher. The reawakened power of life that had seized Natasha was sovidently irrepressible and unexpected by her that in her presencerincess Mary felt that she had no right to reproach her even in hereart.
	 Natasha gave herself up so fully and frankly to this new feelinghat she did not try to hide the fact that she was no longer sad,ut bright and cheerful.
	When Princess Mary returned to her room after her nocturnal talkith Pierre, Natasha met her on the threshold.
	"He has spoken? Yes? He has spoken?" she repeated.
	And a joyful yet pathetic expression which seemed to beg forgivenessor her joy settled on Natasha's face.
	"I wanted to listen at the door, but I knew you would tell me."
	Understandable and touching as the look with which Natasha gazedt her seemed to Princess Mary, and sorry as she was to see hergitation, these words pained her for a moment. She remembered herrother and his love.
	"But what's to be done? She can't help it," thought the princess.
	And with a sad and rather stern look she told Natasha all thatierre had said. On hearing that he was going to Petersburg Natashaas astounded.
	"To Petersburg!" she repeated as if unable to understand.
	But noticing the grieved expression on Princess Mary's face sheuessed the reason of that sadness and suddenly began to cry.
	"Mary," said she, "tell me what I should do! I am afraid of beingad. Whatever you tell me, I will do. Tell me...."
	"You love him?"
	"Yes," whispered Natasha.
	"Then why are you crying? I am happy for your sake," said Princessary, who because of those tears quite forgave Natasha's joy.
	"It won't be just yet- someday. Think what fun it will be when Im his wife and you marry Nicholas!"
	"Natasha, I have asked you not to speak of that. Let us talk aboutou."
	They were silent awhile.
	"But why go to Petersburg?" Natasha suddenly asked, and hastilyeplied to her own question. "But no, no, he must... Yes, Mary, Heust...."EP1	                         FIRST EPILOGUE: 1813 - 20EP1|CH1
	CHAPTER I
	Seven years had passed. The storm-tossed sea of European history hadubsided within its shores and seemed to have become calm. But theysterious forces that move humanity (mysterious because the laws ofheir motion are unknown to us) continued to operate.
	Though the surface of the sea of history seemed motionless, theovement of humanity went on as unceasingly as the flow of time.arious groups of people formed and dissolved, the coming formationnd dissolution of kingdoms and displacement of peoples was inourse of preparation.
	The sea of history was not driven spasmodically from shore tohore as previously. It was seething in its depths. Historic figuresere not borne by the waves from one shore to another as before.hey now seemed to rotate on one spot. The historical figures at theead of armies, who formerly reflected the movement of the masses byrdering wars, campaigns, and battles, now reflected the restlessovement by political and diplomatic combinations, laws, and treaties.
	The historians call this activity of the historical figures "theeaction."
	In dealing with this period they sternly condemn the historicalersonages who, in their opinion, caused what they describe as theeaction. All the well-known people of that period, from Alexander andapoleon to Madame de Stael, Photius, Schelling, Fichte,hateaubriand, and the rest, pass before their stern judgment seat andre acquitted or condemned according to whether they conduced torogress or to reaction.
	According to their accounts a reaction took place at that time inussia also, and the chief culprit was Alexander I, the same man whoccording to them was the chief cause of the liberal movement at theommencement of his reign, being the savior of Russia.
	There is no one in Russian literature now, from schoolboy essayisto learned historian, who does not throw his little stone at Alexanderor things he did wrong at this period of his reign.
	"He ought to have acted in this way and in that way. In this case heid well and in that case badly. He behaved admirably at the beginningf his reign and during 1812, but acted badly by giving a constitutiono Poland, forming the Holy Alliance, entrusting power to Arakcheev,avoring Golitsyn and mysticism, and afterwards Shishkov andhotius. He also acted badly by concerning himself with the activermy and disbanding the Semenov regiment."
	It would take a dozen pages to enumerate all the reproaches theistorians address to him, based on their knowledge of what is goodor humanity.
	What do these reproaches mean?
	Do not the very actions for which the historians praise Alexander (the liberal attempts at the beginning of his reign, his struggleith Napoleon, the firmness he displayed in 1812 and the campaign of813) flow from the same sources- the circumstances of his birth,ducation, and life- that made his personality what it was and fromhich the actions for which they blame him (the Holy Alliance, theestoration of Poland, and the reaction of 1820 and later) alsolowed?
	In what does the substance of those reproaches lie?
	It lies in the fact that an historic character like Alexander I,tanding on the highest possible pinnacle of human power with thelinding light of history focused upon him; a character exposed tohose strongest of all influences: the intrigues, flattery, andelf-deception inseparable from power; a character who at every momentf his life felt a responsibility for all that was happening inurope; and not a fictitious but a live character who like every manad his personal habits, passions, and impulses toward goodness,eauty, and truth- that this character- though not lacking in virtuethe historians do not accuse him of that)- had not the sameonception of the welfare of humanity fifty years ago as a present-dayrofessor who from his youth upwards has been occupied withearning: that is, with books and lectures and with taking notesrom them.
	But even if we assume that fifty years ago Alexander I wasistaken in his view of what was good for the people, we mustnevitably assume that the historian who judges Alexander will alsofter the lapse of some time turn out to be mistaken in his view ofhat is good for humanity. This assumption is all the more natural andnevitable because, watching the movement of history, we see thatvery year and with each new writer, opinion as to what is good forankind changes; so that what once seemed good, ten years latereems bad, and vice versa. And what is more, we find at one and theame time quite contradictory views as to what is bad and what is goodn history: some people regard giving a constitution to Poland andorming the Holy Alliance as praiseworthy in Alexander, while othersegard it as blameworthy.
	The activity of Alexander or of Napoleon cannot be called usefulr harmful, for it is impossible to say for what it was useful orarmful. If that activity displeases somebody, this is only because itoes not agree with his limited understanding of what is good. Whetherhe preservation of my father's house in Moscow, or the glory of theussian arms, or the prosperity of the Petersburg and otherniversities, or the freedom of Poland or the greatness of Russia,r the balance of power in Europe, or a certain kind of Europeanulture called "progress" appear to me to be good or bad, I must admithat besides these things the action of every historic character hasther more general purposes inaccessible to me.
	But let us assume that what is called science can harmonize allontradictions and possesses an unchanging standard of good and bad byhich to try historic characters and events; let us say that Alexanderould have done everything differently; let us say that withuidance from those who blame him and who profess to know the ultimateim of the movement of humanity, he might have arranged mattersccording to the program his present accusers would have given him- ofationality, freedom, equality, and progress (these, I think, coverhe ground). Let us assume that this program was possible and had theneen formulated, and that Alexander had acted on it. What would thenave become of the activity of all those who opposed the tendency thathen prevailed in the government- an activity that in the opinion ofhe historians was good and beneficent? Their activity would notave existed: there would have been no life, there would have beenothing.
	If we admit that human life can be ruled by reason, theossibility of life is destroyed.EP1|CH2
	CHAPTER II
	If we assume as the historians do that great men lead humanity tohe attainment of certain ends- the greatness of Russia or ofrance, the balance of power in Europe, the diffusion of the ideasf the Revolution general progress or anything else- then it ismpossible to explain the facts of history without introducing theonceptions of chance and genius.
	If the aim of the European wars at the beginning of the nineteenthentury had been the aggrandizement of Russia, that aim might haveeen accomplished without all the preceding wars and without thenvasion. If the aim wag the aggrandizement of France, that might haveeen attained without the Revolution and without the Empire. If theim was the dissemination of ideas, the printing press could haveccomplished that much better than warfare. If the aim was therogress of civilization, it is easy to see that there are otherays of diffusing civilization more expedient than by theestruction of wealth and of human lives.
	Why did it happen in this and not in some other way?
	Because it happened so! "Chance created the situation; geniustilized it," says history.
	But what is chance? What is genius?
	The words chance and genius do not denote any really existinghing and therefore cannot be defined. Those words only denote aertain stage of understanding of phenomena. I do not know why aertain event occurs; I think that I cannot know it; so I do not tryo know it and I talk about chance. I see a force producing effectseyond the scope of ordinary human agencies; I do not understand whyhis occurs and I talk of genius.
	To a herd of rams, the ram the herdsman drives each evening into apecial enclosure to feed and that becomes twice as fat as thethers must seem to be a genius. And it must appear an astonishingonjunction of genius with a whole series of extraordinary chanceshat this ram, who instead of getting into the general fold everyvening goes into a special enclosure where there are oats- thathis very ram, swelling with fat, is killed for meat.
	But the rams need only cease to suppose that all that happens tohem happens solely for the attainment of their sheepish aims; theyeed only admit that what happens to them may also have purposeseyond their ken, and they will at once perceive a unity and coherencen what happened to the ram that was fattened. Even if they do notnow for what purpose they are fattened, they will at least knowhat all that happened to the ram did not happen accidentally, andill no longer need the conceptions of chance or genius.
	Only by renouncing our claim to discern a purpose immediatelyntelligible to us, and admitting the ultimate purpose to be beyondur ken, may we discern the sequence of experiences in the lives ofistoric characters and perceive the cause of the effect theyroduce (incommensurable with ordinary human capabilities), and thenhe words chance and genius become superfluous.
	We need only confess that we do not know the purpose of the Europeanonvulsions and that we know only the facts- that is, the murders,irst in France, then in Italy, in Africa, in Prussia, in Austria,n Spain, and in Russia- and that the movements from the west to theast and from the east to the west form the essence and purpose ofhese events, and not only shall we have no need to see exceptionalbility and genius in Napoleon and Alexander, but we shall be unableo consider them to be anything but like other men, and we shall note obliged to have recourse to chance for an explanation of thosemall events which made these people what they were, but it will belear that all those small events were inevitable.
	By discarding a claim to knowledge of the ultimate purpose, we shalllearly perceive that just as one cannot imagine a blossom or seed forny single plant better suited to it than those it produces, so its impossible to imagine any two people more completely adapted downo the smallest detail for the purpose they had to fulfill, thanapoleon and Alexander with all their antecedents.EP1|CH3
	CHAPTER III
	The fundamental and essential significance of the European events ofhe beginning of the nineteenth century lies in the movement of theass of the European peoples from west to east and afterwards fromast to west. The commencement of that movement was the movementrom west to east. For the peoples of the west to be able to makeheir warlike movement to Moscow it was necessary: (1) that theyhould form themselves into a military group of a size able tondure a collision with the warlike military group of the east, (2)hat they should abandon all established traditions and customs, and3) that during their military movement they should have at their head man who could justify to himself and to them the deceptions,obberies, and murders which would have to be committed during thatovement.
	And beginning with the French Revolution the old inadequatelyarge group was destroyed, as well as the old habits and traditions,nd step by step a group was formed of larger dimensions with newustoms and traditions, and a man was produced who would stand athe head of the coming movement and bear the responsibility for allhat had to be done.
	A man without convictions, without habits, without traditions,ithout a name, and not even a Frenchman, emerges- by what seem thetrangest chances- from among all the seething French parties, andithout joining any one of them is borne forward to a prominentosition.
	The ignorance of his colleagues, the weakness and insignificancef his opponents, the frankness of his falsehoods, and the dazzlingnd self-confident limitations of this man raise him to the head ofhe army. The brilliant qualities of the soldiers of the army sento Italy, his opponents' reluctance to fight, and his own childishudacity and self-confidence secure him military fame. Innumerableo called chances accompany him everywhere. The disfavor into which healls with the rulers of France turns to his advantage. His attemptso avoid his predestined path are unsuccessful: he is not receivednto the Russian service, and the appointment he seeks in Turkey comeso nothing. During the war in Italy he is several times on the vergef destruction and each time is saved in an unexpected manner. Owingo various diplomatic considerations the Russian armies- just thosehich might have destroyed his prestige- do not appear upon thecene till he is no longer there.
	On his return from Italy he finds the government in Paris in arocess of dissolution in which all those who are in it are inevitablyiped out and destroyed. And by chance an escape from this dangerousosition presents itself in the form of an aimless and senselessxpedition to Africa. Again so-called chance accompanies him.mpregnable Malta surrenders without a shot; his most reckless schemesre crowned with success. The enemy's fleet, which subsequently didot let a single boat pass, allows his entire army to elude it. Infrica a whole series of outrages are committed against the almostnarmed inhabitants. And the men who commit these crimes, especiallyheir leader, assure themselves that this is admirable, this is glory-t resembles Caesar and Alexander the Great and is therefore good.
	This ideal of glory and grandeur- which consists not merely inonsidering nothing wrong that one does but in priding oneself onvery crime one commits, ascribing to it an incomprehensibleupernatural significance- that ideal, destined to guide this mannd his associates, had scope for its development in Africa.hatever he does succeeds. The plague does not touch him. Theruelty of murdering prisoners is not imputed to him as a fault. Hishildishly rash, uncalled-for, and ignoble departure from Africa,eaving his comrades in distress, is set down to his credit, and againhe enemy's fleet twice lets him slip past. When, intoxicated by therimes he has committed so successfully, he reaches Paris, theissolution of the republican government, which a year earlier mightave ruined him, has reached its extreme limit, and his presence thereow as a newcomer free from party entanglements can only serve toxalt him- and though he himself has no plan, he is quite ready foris new role.
	He had no plan, he was afraid of everything, but the partiesnatched at him and demanded his participation.
	He alone- with his ideal of glory and grandeur developed in Italynd Egypt, his insane self-adulation, his boldness in crime andrankness in lying- he alone could justify what had to be done.
	He is needed for the place that awaits him, and so almost apart fromis will and despite his indecision, his lack of a plan, and all hisistakes, he is drawn into a conspiracy that aims at seizing power andhe conspiracy is crowned with success.
	He is pushed into a meeting of the legislature. In alarm he wisheso flee, considering himself lost. He pretends to fall into a swoonnd says senseless things that should have ruined him. But the onceroud and shrewd rulers of France, feeling that their part is playedut, are even more bewildered than he, and do not say the words theyhould have said to destroy him and retain their power.
	Chance, millions of chances, give him power, and all men as if bygreement co-operate to confirm that power. Chance forms theharacters of the rulers of France, who submit to him; chance formshe character of Paul I of Russia who recognizes his government;hance contrives a plot against him which not only fails to harm himut confirms his power. Chance puts the Duc d'Enghien in his hands andnexpectedly causes him to kill him- thereby convincing the mob moreorcibly than in any other way that he had the right, since he had theight. Chance contrives that though he directs all his efforts torepare an expedition against England (which would inevitably haveuined him) he never carries out that intention, but unexpectedlyalls upon Mack and the Austrians, who surrender without a battle.hance and genius give him the victory at Austerlitz; and by chancell men, not only the French but all Europe- except England which doesot take part in the events about to happen- despite their formerorror and detestation of his crimes, now recognize his authority, theitle he has given himself, and his ideal of grandeur and glory, whicheems excellent and reasonable to them all.
	As if measuring themselves and preparing for the coming movement,he western forces push toward the east several times in 1805, 1806,807, and 1809, gaining strength and growing. In 1811 the group ofeople that had formed in France unites into one group with theeoples of Central Europe. The strength of the justification of thean who stands at the head of the movement grows with the increasedize of the group. During the ten-year preparatory period this man hadormed relations with all the crowned heads of Europe. The discreditedulers of the world can oppose no reasonable ideal to the insensateapoleonic ideal of glory and grandeur. One after another theyasten to display their insignificance before him. The King of Prussiaends his wife to seek the great man's mercy; the Emperor of Austriaonsiders it a favor that this man receives a daughter the Caesarsnto his bed; the Pope, the guardian of all that the nations holdacred, utilizes religion for the aggrandizement of the great man.t is not Napoleon who prepares himself for the accomplishment ofis role, so much as all those round him who prepare him to take onimself the whole responsibility for what is happening and has toappen. There is no step, no crime or petty fraud he commits, which inhe mouths of those around him is not at once represented as a greateed. The most suitable fete the Germans can devise for him is aelebration of Jena and Auerstadt. Not only is he great, but so areis ancestors, his brothers, his stepsons, and his brothers-in-law.verything is done to deprive him of the remains of his reason ando prepare him for his terrible part. And when he is ready so toore the forces.
	The invasion pushes eastward and reaches its final goal- Moscow.hat city is taken; the Russian army suffers heavier losses than thepposing armies had suffered in the former war from Austerlitz toagram. But suddenly instead of those chances and that genius whichitherto had so consistently led him by an uninterrupted series ofuccesses to the predestined goal, an innumerable sequence ofnverse chances occur- from the cold in his head at Borodino to theparks which set Moscow on fire, and the frosts- and instead ofenius, stupidity and immeasurable baseness become evident.
	The invaders flee, turn back, flee again, and all the chances areow not for Napoleon but always against him.
	A countermovement is then accomplished from east to west with aemarkable resemblance to the preceding movement from west to east.ttempted drives from east to west- similar to the contraryovements of 1805, 1807, and 1809- precede the great westwardovement; there is the same coalescence into a group of enormousimensions; the same adhesion of the people of Central Europe to theovement; the same hesitation midway, and the same increasing rapiditys the goal is approached.
	Paris, the ultimate goal, is reached. The Napoleonic governmentnd army are destroyed. Napoleon himself is no longer of anyccount; all his actions are evidently pitiful and mean, but againn inexplicable chance occurs. The allies detest Napoleon whom theyegard as the cause of their sufferings. Deprived of power anduthority, his crimes and his craft exposed, he should have appearedo them what he appeared ten years previously and one year later- anutlawed brigand. But by some strange chance no one perceives this.is part is not yet ended. The man who ten years before and a yearater was considered an outlawed brigand is sent to an island twoays' sail from France, which for some reason is presented to him asis dominion, and guards are given to him and millions of money areaid him.EP1|CH4
	CHAPTER IV
	The flood of nations begins to subside into its normal channels. Theaves of the great movement abate, and on the calm surface eddiesre formed in which float the diplomatists, who imagine that they haveaused the floods to abate.
	But the smooth sea again suddenly becomes disturbed. Theiplomatists think that their disagreements are the cause of thisresh pressure of natural forces; they anticipate war between theirovereigns; the position seems to them insoluble. But the wave theyeel to be rising does not come from the quarter they expect. It risesgain from the same point as before- Paris. The last backwash of theovement from the west occurs: a backwash which serves to solve thepparently insuperable diplomatic difficulties and ends the militaryovement of that period of history.
	The man who had devastated France returns to France alone, withoutny conspiracy and without soldiers. Any guard might arrest him, buty strange chance no one does so and all rapturously greet the manhey cursed the day before and will curse again a month later.
	This man is still needed to justify the final collective act.
	That act is performed.
	The last role is played. The actor is bidden to disrobe and wash offis powder and paint: he will not be wanted any more.
	And some years pass during which he plays a pitiful comedy toimself in solitude on his island, justifying his actions by intriguesnd lies when the justification is no longer needed, and displaying tohe whole world what it was that people had mistaken for strength asong as an unseen hand directed his actions.
	The manager having brought the drama to a close and stripped thector shows him to us.
	"See what you believed in! This is he! Do you now see that it wasot he but I who moved you?"
	But dazed by the force of the movement, it was long before peoplenderstood this.
	Still greater coherence and inevitability is seen in the life oflexander I, the man who stood at the head of the countermovement fromast to west.
	What was needed for him who, overshadowing others, stood at the headf that movement from east to west?
	What was needed was a sense of justice and a sympathy withuropean affairs, but a remote sympathy not dulled by petty interests; moral superiority over those sovereigns of the day who co-operatedith him; a mild and attractive personality; and a personalrievance against Napoleon. And all this was found in Alexander I; allhis had been prepared by innumerable so-called chances in his life:is education, his early liberalism, the advisers who surroundedim, and by Austerlitz, and Tilsit, and Erfurt.
	During the national war he was inactive because he was not needed.ut as soon as the necessity for a general European war presentedtself he appeared in his place at the given moment and, uniting theations of Europe, led them to the goal.
	The goal is reached. After the final war of 1815 Alexander possessesll possible power. How does he use it?
	Alexander I- the pacifier of Europe, the man who from his earlyears had striven only for his people's welfare, the originator of theiberal innovations in his fatherland- now that he seemed to possesshe utmost power and therefore to have the possibility of bringingbout the welfare of his peoples- at the time when Napoleon in exileas drawing up childish and mendacious plans of how he would have madeankind happy had he retained power- Alexander I, having fulfilled hisission and feeling the hand of God upon him, suddenly recognizeshe insignificance of that supposed power, turns away from it, andives it into the hands of contemptible men whom he despises, sayingnly:
	"Not unto us, not unto us, but unto Thy Name!... I too am a man likehe rest of you. Let me live like a man and think of my soul and ofod."
	As the sun and each atom of ether is a sphere complete in itself,nd yet at the same time only a part of a whole too immense for man toomprehend, so each individual has within himself his own aims and yetas them to serve a general purpose incomprehensible to man.
	A bee settling on a flower has stung a child. And the child isfraid of bees and declares that bees exist to sting people. A poetdmires the bee sucking from the chalice of a flower and says itxists to suck the fragrance of flowers. A beekeeper, seeing the beeollect pollen from flowers and carry it to the hive, says that itxists to gather honey. Another beekeeper who has studied the lifef the hive more closely says that the bee gathers pollen dust to feedhe young bees and rear a queen, and that it exists to perpetuatets race. A botanist notices that the bee flying with the pollen of male flower to a pistil fertilizes the latter, and sees in thishe purpose of the bee's existence. Another, observing the migrationf plants, notices that the bee helps in this work, and may say thatn this lies the purpose of the bee. But the ultimate purpose of theee is not exhausted by the first, the second, or any of the processeshe human mind can discern. The higher the human intellect rises inhe discovery of these purposes, the more obvious it becomes, that theltimate purpose is beyond our comprehension.
	All that is accessible to man is the relation of the life of the beeo other manifestations of life. And so it is with the purpose ofistoric characters and nations.EP1|CH5
	CHAPTER V
	Natasha's wedding to Bezukhov, which took place in 1813, was theast happy event in the family of the old Rostovs. Count Ilya Rostovied that same year and, as always happens, after the father's deathhe family group broke up.
	The events of the previous year: the burning of Moscow and thelight from it, the death of Prince Andrew, Natasha's despair, Petya'seath, and the old countess' grief fell blow after blow on the oldount's head. He seemed to be unable to understand the meaning ofll these events, and bowed his old head in a spiritual sense as ifxpecting and inviting further blows which would finish him. He seemedow frightened and distraught and now unnaturally animated andnterprising.
	The arrangements for Natasha's marriage occupied him for a while. Herdered dinners and suppers and obviously tried to appear cheerful,ut his cheerfulness was not infectious as it used to be: on theontrary it evoked the compassion of those who knew and liked him.
	When Pierre and his wife had left, he grew very quiet and began toomplain of depression. A few days later he fell ill and took to hised. He realized from the first that he would not get up again,espite the doctor's encouragement. The countess passed a fortnight inn armchair by his pillow without undressing. Every time she gaveim his medicine he sobbed and silently kissed her hand. On his lastay, sobbing, he asked her and his absent son to forgive him foraving dissipated their property- that being the chief fault ofhich he was conscious. After receiving communion and unction heuietly died; and next day a throng of acquaintances who came to payheir last respects to the deceased filled the house rented by theostovs. All these acquaintances, who had so often dined and danced atis house and had so often laughed at him, now said, with a commoneeling of self-reproach and emotion, as if justifying themselves:Well, whatever he may have been he was a most worthy man. You don'teet such men nowadays.... And which of us has not weaknesses of hiswn?"
	It was just when the count's affairs had become so involved thatt was impossible to say what would happen if he lived another yearhat he unexpectedly died.
	Nicholas was with the Russian army in Paris when the news of hisather's death reached him. He at once resigned his commission, andithout waiting for it to be accepted took leave of absence and wento Moscow. The state of the count's affairs became quite obvious aonth after his death, surprising everyone by the immense total ofmall debts the existence of which no one had suspected. The debtsmounted to double the value of the property.
	Friends and relations advised Nicholas to decline the inheritance.ut he regarded such a refusal as a slur on his father's memory, whiche held sacred, and therefore would not hear of refusing andccepted the inheritance together with the obligation to pay theebts.
	The creditors who had so long been silent, restrained by a vague butowerful influence exerted on them while he lived by the count'sareless good nature, all proceeded to enforce their claims at once.s always happens in such cases rivalry sprang up as to which shouldet paid first, and those who like Mitenka held promissory notes givenhem as presents now became the most exacting of the creditors.icholas was allowed no respite and no peace, and those who had seemedo pity the old man- the cause of their losses (if they wereosses)- now remorselessly pursued the young heir who hadoluntarily undertaken the debts and was obviously not guilty ofontracting them.
	Not one of the plans Nicholas tried succeeded; the estate was soldy auction for half its value, and half the debts still remainednpaid. Nicholas accepted thirty thousand rubles offered him by hisrother-in-law Bezukhov to pay off debts he regarded as genuinelyue for value received. And to avoid being imprisoned for theemainder, as the creditors threatened, he re-entered the governmentervice.
	He could not rejoin the army where he would have been made colonelt the next vacancy, for his mother now clung to him as her one holdn life; and so despite his reluctant to remain in Moscow among peopleho had known him before, and despite his abhorrence of the civilervice, he accepted a post in Moscow in that service, doffed theniform of which he was so fond, and moved with his mother and Sonyao a small house on the Sivtsev Vrazhek.
	Natasha and Pierre were living in Petersburg at the time and hado clear idea of Nicholas' circumstances. Having borrowed money fromis brother-in-law, Nicholas tried to hide his wretched condition fromim. His position was the more difficult because with his salary ofwelve hundred rubles he had not only to keep himself, his mother, andonya, but had to shield his mother from knowledge of their poverty.he countess could not conceive of life without the luxuriousonditions she had been used to from childhood and, unable toealize how hard it was for her son, kept demanding now a carriagewhich they did not keep) to send for a friend, now some expensiverticle of food for herself, or wine for her son, or money to buy aresent as a surprise for Natasha or Sonya, or for Nicholas himself.
	Sonya kept house, attended on her aunt, read to her, put up with herhims and secret ill-will, and helped Nicholas to conceal theiroverty from the old countess. Nicholas felt himself irredeemablyndebted to Sonya for all she was doing for his mother and greatlydmired her patience and devotion, but tried to keep aloof from her.
	He seemed in his heart to reproach her for being too perfect, andecause there was nothing to reproach her with. She had all thateople are valued for, but little that could have made him love her.e felt that the more he valued her the less he loved her. He hadaken her at her word when she wrote giving him his freedom and nowehaved as if all that had passed between them had been long forgottennd could never in any case be renewed.
	Nicholas' position became worse and worse. The idea of puttingomething aside out of his salary proved a dream. Not only did heot save anything, but to comply with his mother's demands he evenncurred some small debts. He could see no way out of thisituation. The idea of marrying some rich woman, which was suggestedo him by his female relations, was repugnant to him. The other wayut- his mother's death- never entered his head. He wished for nothingnd hoped for nothing, and deep in his heart experienced a gloomynd stern satisfaction in an uncomplaining endurance of hisosition. He tried to avoid his old acquaintances with theirommiseration and offensive offers of assistance; he avoided allistraction and recreation, and even at home did nothing but playards with his mother, pace silently up and down the room, and smokene pipe after another. He seemed carefully to cherish withinimself the gloomy mood which alone enabled him to endure hisosition.EP1|CH6
	CHAPTER VI
	At the beginning of winter Princess Mary came to Moscow. Fromeports current in town she learned how the Rostovs were situated, andow "the son has sacrificed himself for his mother," as people wereaying.
	"I never expected anything else of him," said Princess Mary toerself, feeling a joyous sense of her love for him. Remembering herriendly relations with all the Rostovs which had made her almost aember of the family, she thought it her duty to go to see them. Butemembering her relations with Nicholas in Voronezh she was shybout doing so. Making a great effort she did however go to call onhem a few weeks after her arrival in Moscow.
	Nicholas was the first to meet her, as the countess' room could onlye reached through his. But instead of being greeted with pleasures she had expected, at his first glance at her his face assumed aold, stiff, proud expression she had not seen on it before. Henquired about her health, led the way to his mother, and having sathere for five minutes left the room.
	When the princess came out of the countess' room Nicholas met hergain, and with marked solemnity and stiffness accompanied her tohe anteroom. To her remarks about his mother's health he made noeply. "What's that to you? Leave me in peace," his looks seemed toay.
	"Why does she come prowling here? What does she want? I can't bearhese ladies and all these civilities!" said he aloud in Sonya'sresence, evidently unable to repress his vexation, after therincess' carriage had disappeared.
	"Oh, Nicholas, how can you talk like that?" cried Sonya, hardly ableo conceal her delight. "She is so kind and Mamma is so fond of her!"
	Nicholas did not reply and tried to avoid speaking of the princessny more. But after her visit the old countess spoke of her severalimes a day.
	She sang her praises, insisted that her son must call on her,xpressed a wish to see her often, but yet always became ill-humoredhen she began to talk about her.
	Nicholas tried to keep silence when his mother spoke of therincess, but his silence irritated her.
	"She is a very admirable and excellent young woman," said she,and you must go and call on her. You would at least be seeingomebody, and I think it must be dull for you only seeing us."
	"But I don't in the least want to, Mamma."
	"You used to want to, and now you don't. Really I don't understandou, my dear. One day you are dull, and the next you refuse to seenyone."
	"But I never said I was dull."
	"Why, you said yourself you don't want even to see her. She is aery admirable young woman and you always liked her, but nowuddenly you have got some notion or other in your head. You hideverything from me."
	"Not at all, Mamma."
	"If I were asking you to do something disagreeable now- but I onlysk you to return a call. One would think mere politeness requiredt.... Well, I have asked you, and now I won't interfere any moreince you have secrets from your mother."
	"Well, then, I'll go if you wish it."
	"It doesn't matter to me. I only wish it for your sake."
	Nicholas sighed, bit his mustache, and laid out the cards for aatience, trying to divert his mother's attention to another topic.
	The same conversation was repeated next day and the day after, andhe day after that.
	After her visit to the Rostovs and her unexpectedly chilly receptiony Nicholas, Princess Mary confessed to herself that she had beenight in not wishing to be the first to call.
	"I expected nothing else," she told herself, calling her pride toer aid. "I have nothing to do with him and I only wanted to see theld lady, who was always kind to me and to whom I am under manybligations."
	But she could not pacify herself with these reflections; a feelingkin to remorse troubled her when she thought of her visit. Though shead firmly resolved not to call on the Rostovs again and to forget thehole matter, she felt herself all the time in an awkward position.nd when she asked herself what distressed her, she had to admithat it was her relation to Rostov. His cold, polite manner did notxpress his feeling for her (she knew that) but it concealedomething, and until she could discover what that something was, sheelt that she could not be at ease.
	One day in midwinter when sitting in the schoolroom attending to herephew's lessons, she was informed that Rostov had called. With a firmesolution not to betray herself and not show her agitation, sheent for Mademoiselle Bourienne and went with her to the drawing room.
	Her first glance at Nicholas' face told her that he had only come toulfill the demands of politeness, and she firmly resolved to maintainhe tone in which he addressed her.
	They spoke of the countess' health, of their mutual friends, ofhe latest war news, and when the ten minutes required by proprietyad elapsed after which a visitor may rise, Nicholas got up to sayood-by.
	With Mademoiselle Bourienne's help the princess had maintained theonversation very well, but at the very last moment, just when heose, she was so tired of talking of what did not interest her, ander mind was so full of the question why she alone was granted soittle happiness in life, that in a fit of absent-mindedness she sattill, her luminous eyes gazing fixedly before her, not noticinghat he had risen.
	Nicholas glanced at her and, wishing to appear not to notice herbstraction, made some remark to Mademoiselle Bourienne and then againooked at the princess. She still sat motionless with a look ofuffering on her gentle face. He suddenly felt sorry for her and wasaguely conscious that he might be the cause of the sadness her facexpressed. He wished to help her and say something pleasant, but couldhink of nothing to say.
	"Good-by, Princess!" said he.
	She started, flushed, and sighed deeply.
	"Oh, I beg your pardon," she said as if waking up. "Are you goinglready, Count? Well then, good-by! Oh, but the cushion for theountess!"
	"Wait a moment, I'll fetch it," said Mademoiselle Bourienne, and sheeft the room.
	They both sat silent, with an occasional glance at one another.
	"Yes, Princess," said Nicholas at last with a sad smile, "it doesn'teem long ago since we first met at Bogucharovo, but how much wateras flowed since then! In what distress we all seemed to be then,et I would give much to bring back that time... but there's noringing it back."
	Princess Mary gazed intently into his eyes with her own luminousnes as he said this. She seemed to be trying to fathom the hiddeneaning of his words which would explain his feeling for her.
	"Yes, yes," said she, "but you have no reason to regret the past,ount. As I understand your present life, I think you will alwaysecall it with satisfaction, because the self-sacrifice that fillst now..."
	"I cannot accept your praise," he interrupted her hurriedly. "On theontrary I continually reproach myself.... But this is not at all annteresting or cheerful subject."
	His face again resumed its former stiff and cold expression. But therincess had caught a glimpse of the man she had known and loved,nd it was to him that she now spoke.
	"I thought you would allow me to tell you this," she said. "I hadome so near to you... and to all your family that I thought you wouldot consider my sympathy misplaced, but I was mistaken," anduddenly her voice trembled. "I don't know why," she continued,ecovering herself, "but you used to be different, and..."
	"There are a thousand reasons why," laying special emphasis on thehy. "Thank you, Princess," he added softly. "Sometimes it is hard."
	"So that's why! That's why!" a voice whispered in Princess Mary'soul. "No, it was not only that gay, kind, and frank look, not onlyhat handsome exterior, that I loved in him. I divined his noble,esolute, self-sacrificing spirit too," she said to herself. "Yes,e is poor now and I am rich.... Yes, that's the only reason....es, were it not for that..." And remembering his former tenderness,nd looking now at his kind, sorrowful face, she suddenly understoodhe cause of his coldness.
	"But why, Count, why?" she almost cried, unconsciously moving closero him. "Why? Tell me. You must tell me!"
	He was silent.
	"I don't understand your why, Count," she continued, "but it'sard for me... I confess it. For some reason you wish to deprive me ofur former friendship. And that hurts me." There were tears in heryes and in her voice. "I have had so little happiness in life thatvery loss is hard for me to bear.... Excuse me, good-by!" anduddenly she began to cry and was hurrying from the room.
	"Princess, for God's sake!" he exclaimed, trying to stop her.Princess!"
	She turned round. For a few seconds they gazed silently into onenother's eyes- and what had seemed impossible and remote suddenlyecame possible, inevitable, and very near.EP1|CH7
	CHAPTER VII
	In the winter of 1813 Nicholas married Princess Mary and moved toald Hills with his wife, his mother, and Sonya.
	Within four years he had paid off all his remaining debts withoutelling any of his wife's property, and having received a smallnheritance on the death of a cousin he paid his debt to Pierre asell.
	In another three years, by 1820, he had so managed his affairshat he was able to buy a small estate adjoining Bald Hills and wasegotiating to buy back Otradnoe- that being his pet dream.
	Having started farming from necessity, he soon grew so devoted to ithat it became his favorite and almost his sole occupation. Nicholasas a plain farmer: he did not like innovations, especially thenglish ones then coming into vogue. He laughed at theoreticalreatises on estate management, disliked factories, the raising ofxpensive products, and the buying of expensive seed corn, and did notake a hobby of any particular part of the work on his estate. Helways had before his mind's eye the estate as a whole and not anyarticular part of it. The chief thing in his eyes was not theitrogen in the soil, nor the oxygen in the air, nor manures, norpecial plows, but that most important agent by which nitrogen,xygen, manure, and plow were made effective- the peasant laborer.hen Nicholas first began farming and began to understand itsifferent branches, it was the serf who especially attracted histtention. The peasant seemed to him not merely a tool, but also audge of farming and an end in himself. At first he watched the serfs,rying to understand their aims and what they considered good and bad,nd only pretended to direct them and give orders while in realityearning from them their methods, their manner of speech, and theirudgment of what was good and bad. Only when he had understood theeasants' tastes and aspirations, had learned to talk theiranguage, to grasp the hidden meaning of their words, and felt akin tohem did he begin boldly to manage his serfs, that is, to performoward them the duties demanded of him. And Nicholas' managementroduced very brilliant results.
	Guided by some gift of insight, on taking up the management of thestates he at once unerringly appointed as bailiff, village elder, andelegate, the very men the serfs would themselves have chosen had theyad the right to choose, and these posts never changed hands. Beforenalyzing the properties of manure, before entering into the debit andredit (as he ironically called it), he found out how many cattlehe peasants had and increased the number by all possible means. Heept the peasant families together in the largest groups possible, notllowing the family groups to divide into separate households. Heas hard alike on the lazy, the depraved, and the weak, and tried toet them expelled from the commune.
	He was as careful of the sowing and reaping of the peasants' hay andorn as of his own, and few landowners had their crops sown andarvested so early and so well, or got so good a return, as didicholas.
	He disliked having anything to do with the domestic serfs- thedrones" as he called them- and everyone said he spoiled them by hisaxity. When a decision had to be taken regarding a domestic serf,specially if one had to be punished, he always felt undecided andonsulted everybody in the house; but when it was possible to have aomestic serf conscripted instead of a land worker he did so withouthe least hesitation. He never felt any hesitation in dealing with theeasants. He knew that his every decision would be approved by themll with very few exceptions.
	He did not allow himself either to be hard on or punish a man, or toake things easy for or reward anyone, merely because he felt inclinedo do so. He could not have said by what standard he judged what hehould or should not do, but the standard was quite firm andefinite in his own mind.
	Often, speaking with vexation of some failure or irregularity, heould say: "What can one do with our Russian peasants?" and imaginedhat he could not bear them.
	Yet he loved "our Russian peasants" and their way of life with hishole soul, and for that very reason had understood and assimilatedhe one way and manner of farming which produced good results.
	Countess Mary was jealous of this passion of her husband's andegretted that she could not share it; but she could not understandhe joys and vexations he derived from that world, to her so remotend alien. She could not understand why he was so particularlynimated and happy when, after getting up at daybreak and spending thehole morning in the fields or on the threshing floor, he returnedrom the sowing or mowing or reaping to have tea with her. She did notnderstand why he spoke with such admiration and delight of thearming of the thrifty and well-to-do peasant Matthew Ermishin, whoith his family had carted corn all night; or of the fact that hisNicholas') sheaves were already stacked before anyone else had hisarvest in. She did not understand why he stepped out from theindow to the veranda and smiled under his mustache and winked sooyfully, when warm steady rain began to fall on the dry and thirstyhoots of the young oats, or why when the wind carried away ahreatening cloud during the hay harvest he would return from thearn, flushed, sunburned, and perspiring, with a smell of wormwood andentian in his hair and, gleefully rubbing his hands, would say:Well, one more day and my grain and the peasants' will all be underover."
	Still less did she understand why he, kindhearted and always readyo anticipate her wishes, should become almost desperate when sherought him a petition from some peasant men or women who had appealedo her to be excused some work; why he, that kind Nicholas, shouldbstinately refuse her, angrily asking her not to interfere in whatas not her business. She felt he had a world apart, which he lovedassionately and which had laws she had not fathomed.
	Sometimes when, trying to understand him, she spoke of the good worke was doing for his serfs, he would be vexed and reply: "Not in theeast; it never entered my head and I wouldn't do that for their good!hat's all poetry and old wives' talk- all that doing good to one'seighbor! What I want is that our children should not have to goegging. I must put our affairs in order while I am alive, that's all.nd to do that, order and strictness are essential.... That's allbout it!" said he, clenching his vigorous fist. "And fairness, ofourse," he added, "for if the peasant is naked and hungry and hasnly one miserable horse, he can do no good either for himself oror me."
	And all Nicholas did was fruitful- probably just because heefused to allow himself to think that he was doing good to others forirtue's sake. His means increased rapidly; serfs from neighboringstates came to beg him to buy them, and long after his death theemory of his administration was devoutly preserved among the serfs.He was a master... the peasants' affairs first and then his own. Ofourse he was not to be trifled with either- in a word, he was aeal master!"EP1|CH8
	CHAPTER VIII
	One matter connected with his management sometimes worried Nicholas,nd that was his quick temper together with his old hussar habit ofaking free use of his fists. At first he saw nothing reprehensible inhis, but in the second year of his marriage his view of that formf punishment suddenly changed.
	Once in summer he had sent for the village elder from Bogucharovo, aan who had succeeded to the post when Dron died and who was accusedf dishonesty and various irregularities. Nicholas went out into theorch to question him, and immediately after the elder had given a feweplies the sound of cries and blows were heard. On returning to lunchicholas went up to his wife, who sat with her head bent low overer embroidery frame, and as usual began to tell her what he hadeen doing that morning. Among other things he spoke of theogucharovo elder. Countess Mary turned red and then pale, butontinued to sit with head bowed and lips compressed and gave herusband no reply.
	"Such an insolent scoundrel!" he cried, growing hot again at theere recollection of him. "If he had told me he was drunk and didot see... But what is the matter with you, Mary?" he suddenly asked.
	Countess Mary raised her head and tried to speak, but hastily lookedown again and her lips puckered.
	"Why, whatever is the matter, my dearest?"
	The looks of the plain Countess Mary always improved when she was inears. She never cried from pain or vexation, but always from sorrowr pity, and when she wept her radiant eyes acquired an irresistibleharm.
	The moment Nicholas took her hand she could no longer restrainerself and began to cry.
	"Nicholas, I saw it... he was to blame, but why do you... Nicholas!"nd she covered her face with her hands.
	Nicholas said nothing. He flushed crimson, left her side, andaced up and down the room. He understood what she was weepingbout, but could not in his heart at once agree with her that whate had regarded from childhood as quite an everyday event was wrong.Is it just sentimentality, old wives' tales, or is she right?" hesked himself. Before he had solved that point he glanced again at herace filled with love and pain, and he suddenly realized that sheas right and that he had long been sinning against himself.
	"Mary," he said softly, going up to her, "it will never happengain; I give you my word. Never," he repeated in a trembling voiceike a boy asking for forgiveness.
	The tears flowed faster still from the countess' eyes. She tookis hand and kissed it.
	"Nicholas, when when did you break your cameo?" she asked tohange the subject, looking at his finger on which he wore a ring with cameo of Laocoon's head.
	"Today- it was the same affair. Oh, Mary, don't remind me of it!"nd again he flushed. "I give you my word of honor it shan't occurgain, and let this always be a reminder to me," and he pointed to theroken ring.
	After that, when in discussions with his village elders ortewards the blood rushed to his face and his fists began to clench,icholas would turn the broken ring on his finger and would drop hisyes before the man who was making him angry. But he did forgetimself once or twice within a twelvemonth, and then he would go andonfess to his wife, and would again promise that this should reallye the very last time.
	"Mary, you must despise me!" he would say. "I deserve it."
	"You should go, go away at once, if you don't feel strong enougho control yourself," she would reply sadly, trying to comfort herusband.
	Among the gentry of the province Nicholas was respected but notiked. He did not concern himself with the interests of his own class,nd consequently some thought him proud and others thought him stupid.he whole summer, from spring sowing to harvest, he was busy withhe work on his farm. In autumn he gave himself up to hunting with theame business like seriousness- leaving home for a month, or even two,ith his hunt. In winter he visited his other villages or spent hisime reading. The books he read were chiefly historical, and onhese he spent a certain sum every year. He was collecting, as heaid, a serious library, and he made it a rule to read through all theooks he bought. He would sit in his study with a grave air,eading- a task he first imposed upon himself as a duty, but whichfterwards became a habit affording him a special kind of pleasure and consciousness of being occupied with serious matters. In winter,xcept for business excursions, he spent most of his time at homeaking himself one with his family and entering into all the detailsf his children's relations with their mother. The harmony between himnd his wife grew closer and closer and he daily discovered freshpiritual treasures in her.
	From the time of his marriage Sonya had lived in his house. Beforehat, Nicholas had told his wife all that had passed between himselfnd Sonya, blaming himself and commending her. He had asked Princessary to be gentle and kind to his cousin. She thoroughly realizedhe wrong he had done Sonya, felt herself to blame toward her, andmagined that her wealth had influenced Nicholas' choice. She couldot find fault with Sonya in any way and tried to be fond of her,ut often felt ill-will toward her which she could not overcome.
	Once she had a talk with her friend Natasha about Sonya and abouter own injustice toward her.
	"You know," said Natasha, "you have read the Gospels a great deal-here is a passage in them that just fits Sonya."
	"What?" asked Countess Mary, surprised.
	"'To him that hath shall be given, and from him that hath nothall be taken away.' You remember? She is one that hath not; why, Ion't know. Perhaps she lacks egotism, I don't know, but from her isaken away, and everything has been taken away. Sometimes I amreadfully sorry for her. Formerly I very much wanted Nicholas toarry her, but I always had a sort of presentiment that it would notome off. She is a sterile flower, you know- like some strawberrylossoms. Sometimes I am sorry for her, and sometimes I think sheoesn't feel it as you or I would."
	Though Countess Mary told Natasha that those words in the Gospelust be understood differently, yet looking at Sonya she agreed withatasha's explanation. It really seemed that Sonya did not feel herosition trying, and had grown quite reconciled to her lot as aterile flower. She seemed to be fond not so much of individuals as ofhe family as a whole. Like a cat, she had attached herself not to theeople but to the home. She waited on the old countess, petted andpoiled the children, was always ready to render the small servicesor which she had a gift, and all this was unconsciously accepted fromer with insufficient gratitude.
	The country seat at Bald Hills had been rebuilt, though not on theame scale as under the old prince.
	The buildings, begun under straitened circumstances, were morehan simple. The immense house on the old stone foundations was ofood, plastered only inside. It had bare deal floors and was furnishedith very simple hard sofas, armchairs, tables, and chairs made byheir own serf carpenters out of their own birchwood. The house waspacious and had rooms for the house serfs and apartments forisitors. Whole families of the Rostovs' and Bolkonskis' relationsometimes came to Bald Hills with sixteen horses and dozens ofervants and stayed for months. Besides that, four times a year, onhe name days and birthdays of the hosts, as many as a hundredisitors would gather there for a day or two. The rest of the yearife pursued its unbroken routine with its ordinary occupations, andts breakfasts, lunches, dinners, and suppers, provided out of theroduce of the estate.EP1|CH9
	CHAPTER IX
	It was the eve of St. Nicholas, the fifth of December, 1820. Natashaad been staying at her brother's with her husband and childrenince early autumn. Pierre had gone to Petersburg on business of hiswn for three weeks as he said, but had remained there nearly seveneeks and was expected back every minute.
	Besides the Bezukhov family, Nicholas' old friend the retiredeneral Vasili Dmitrich Denisov was staying with the Rostovs thisifth of December.
	On the sixth, which was his name day when the house would be full ofisitors, Nicholas knew he would have to exchange his Tartar tunic for tail coat, and put on narrow boots with pointed toes, and drive tohe new church he had built, and then receive visitors who wouldome to congratulate him, offer them refreshments, and talk abouthe elections of the nobility; but he considered himself entitled topend the eve of that day in his usual way. He examined theailiff's accounts of the village in Ryazan which belonged to hisife's nephew, wrote two business letters, and walked over to theranaries, cattle yards and stables before dinner. Having takenrecautions against the general drunkenness to be expected on theorrow because it was a great saint's day, he returned to dinner,nd without having time for a private talk with his wife sat down athe long table laid for twenty persons, at which the whole householdad assembled. At that table were his mother, his mother's old ladyompanion Belova, his wife, their three children with theiroverness and tutor, his wife's nephew with his tutor, Sonya, Denisov,atasha, her three children, their governess, and old Michaelvanovich, the late prince's architect, who was living on inetirement at Bald Hills.
	Countess Mary sat at the other end of the table. When her husbandook his place she concluded, from the rapid manner in which afteraking up his table napkin he pushed back the tumbler and wineglasstanding before him, that he was out of humor, as was sometimes thease when he came in to dinner straight from the farm- especiallyefore the soup. Countess Mary well knew that mood of his, and whenhe herself was in a good frame of mind quietly waited till he had hadis soup and then began to talk to him and make him admit that thereas no cause for his ill-humor. But today she quite forgot that andas hurt that he should be angry with her without any reason, andhe felt unhappy. She asked him where he had been. He replied. Shegain inquired whether everything was going well on the farm. Hernnatural tone made him wince unpleasantly and he replied hastily.
	"Then I'm not mistaken," thought Countess Mary. "Why is he crossith me?" She concluded from his tone that he was vexed with her andished to end the conversation. She knew her remarks soundednnatural, but could not refrain from asking some more questions.
	Thanks to Denisov the conversation at table soon became generalnd lively, and she did not talk to her husband. When they left theable and went as usual to thank the old countess, Countess Maryeld out her hand and kissed her husband, and asked him why he wasngry with her.
	"You always have such strange fancies! I didn't even think ofeing angry," he replied.
	But the word always seemed to her to imply: "Yes, I am angry but Ion't tell you why."
	Nicholas and his wife lived together so happily that even Sonyand the old countess, who felt jealous and would have liked them toisagree, could find nothing to reproach them with; but even theyad their moments of antagonism. Occasionally, and it was alwaysust after they had been happiest together, they suddenly had aeeling of estrangement and hostility, which occurred mostrequently during Countess Mary's pregnancies, and this was such aime.
	"Well, messieurs et mesdames," said Nicholas loudly and withpparent cheerfulness (it seemed to Countess Mary that he did it onurpose to vex her), "I have been on my feet since six this morning.omorrow I shall have to suffer, so today I'll go and rest."
	And without a word to his wife he went to the little sitting roomnd lay down on the sofa.
	"That's always the way," thought Countess Mary. "He talks toveryone except me. I see... I see that I am repulsive to him,specially when I am in this condition." She looked down at herxpanded figure and in the glass at her pale, sallow, emaciated facen which her eyes now looked larger than ever.
	And everything annoyed her- Denisov's shouting and laughter,atasha's talk, and especially a quick glance Sonya gave her.
	Sonya was always the first excuse Countess Mary found for feelingrritated.
	Having sat awhile with her visitors without understanding anythingf what they were saying, she softly left the room and went to theursery.
	The children were playing at "going to Moscow" in a carriage made ofhairs and invited her to go with them. She sat down and played withhem a little, but the thought of her husband and his unreasonablerossness worried her. She got up and, walking on tiptoe withifficulty, went to the small sitting room.
	"Perhaps he is not asleep; I'll have an explanation with him," sheaid to herself. Little Andrew, her eldest boy, imitating hisother, followed her on tiptoe. She not notice him.
	"Mary, dear, I think he is asleep- he was so tired," said Sonya,eeting her in the large sitting room (it seemed to Countess Mary thathe crossed her path everywhere). "Andrew may wake him."
	Countess Mary looked round, saw little Andrew following her, felthat Sonya was right, and for that very reason flushed and withvident difficulty refrained from saying something harsh. She madeo reply, but to avoid obeying Sonya beckoned to Andrew to follower quietly and went to the door. Sonya went away by another door.rom the room in which Nicholas was sleeping came the sound of hisven breathing, every slightest tone of which was familiar to hisife. As she listened to it she saw before her his smooth handsomeorehead, his mustache, and his whole face, as she had so often seent in the stillness of the night when he slept. Nicholas suddenlyoved and cleared his throat. And at that moment little Andrew shoutedrom outside the door: "Papa! Mamma's standing here!" Countess Maryurned pale with fright and made signs to the boy. He grew silent, anduiet ensued for a moment, terrible to Countess Mary. She knew howicholas disliked being waked. Then through the door she heardicholas clearing his throat again and stirring, and his voice saidrossly:
	"I can't get a moment's peace.... Mary, is that you? Why did youring him here?"
	"I only came in to look and did not notice... forgive me..."
	Nicholas coughed and said no more. Countess Mary moved away from theoor and took the boy back to the nursery. Five minutes later littlelack-eyed three-year-old Natasha, her father's pet, having learnedrom her brother that Papa was asleep and Mamma was in the sittingoom, ran to her father unobserved by her mother. The dark-eyed littleirl boldly opened the creaking door, went up to the sofa withnergetic steps of her sturdy little legs, and having examined theosition of her father, who was asleep with his back to her, rose oniptoe and kissed the hand which lay under his head. Nicholas turnedith a tender smile on his face.
	"Natasha, Natasha!" came Countess Mary's frightened whisper from theoor. "Papa wants to sleep."
	"No, Mamma, he doesn't want to sleep," said little Natasha withonviction. "He's laughing."
	Nicholas lowered his legs, rose, and took his daughter in his arms.
	"Come in, Mary," he said to his wife.
	She went in and sat down by her husband.
	"I did not notice him following me," she said timidly. "I justooked in."
	Holding his little girl with one arm, Nicholas glanced at his wifend, seeing her guilty expression, put his other arm around her andissed her hair.
	"May I kiss Mamma?" he asked Natasha.
	Natasha smiled bashfully.
	"Again!" she commanded, pointing with a peremptory gesture to thepot where Nicholas had placed the kiss.
	"I don't know why you think I am cross," said Nicholas, replyingo the question he knew was in his wife's mind.
	"You have no idea how unhappy, how lonely, I feel when you areike that. It always seems to me... "
	"Mary, don't talk nonsense. You ought to be ashamed of yourself!" heaid gaily.
	"It seems to be that you can't love me, that I am so plain...lways... and now... in this cond..."
	"Oh, how absurd you are! It is not beauty that endears, it's lovehat makes us see beauty. It is only Malvinas and women of that kindho are loved for their beauty. But do I love my wife? I don't loveer, but... I don't know how to put it. Without you, or when somethingomes between us like this, I seem lost and can't do anything. Nowo I love my finger? I don't love it, but just try to cut it off!
	"I'm not like that myself, but I understand. So you're not angryith me?"
	"Awfully angry!" he said, smiling and getting up. And smoothingis hair he began to pace the room.
	"Do you know, Mary, what I've been thinking?" he began,mmediately thinking aloud in his wife's presence now that they hadade it up.
	He did not ask if she was ready to listen to him. He did not care. Ahought had occurred to him and so it belonged to her also. And heold her of his intention to persuade Pierre to stay with them tillpring.
	Countess Mary listened till he had finished, made some remark, andn her turn began thinking aloud. Her thoughts were about thehildren.
	"You can see the woman in her already," she said in French, pointingo little Natasha. "You reproach us women with being illogical. Heres our logic. I say: 'Papa wants to sleep!' but she says, 'No, he'saughing.' And she was right," said Countess Mary with a happy smile.
	"Yes, yes." And Nicholas, taking his little daughter in his strongand, lifted her high, placed her on his shoulder, held her by theegs, and paced the room with her. There was an expression of carefreeappiness on the faces of both father and daughter.
	"But you know you may be unfair. You are too fond of this one,"is wife whispered in French.
	"Yes, but what am I to do?... I try not to show..."
	At that moment they heard the sound of the door pulley and footstepsn the hall and anteroom, as if someone had arrived.
	"Somebody has come."
	"I am sure it is Pierre. I will go and see," said Countess Marynd left the room.
	In her absence Nicholas allowed himself to give his littleaughter a gallop round the room. Out of breath, he took theaughing child quickly from his shoulder and pressed her to his heart.is capers reminded him of dancing, and looking at the child's roundappy little face he thought of what she would be like when he wasn old man, taking her into society and dancing the mazurka with hers his old father had danced Daniel Cooper with his daughter.
	"It is he, it is he, Nicholas!" said Countess Mary, re-enteringhe room a few minutes later. "Now our Natasha has come to life. Youhould have seen her ecstasy, and how he caught it for having stayedway so long. Well, come along now, quick, quick! It's time you twoere parted," she added, looking smilingly at the little girl wholung to her father.
	Nicholas went out holding the child by the hand.
	Countess Mary remained in the sitting room.
	"I should never, never have believed that one could be so happy,"he whispered to herself. A smile lit up her face but at the same timehe sighed, and her deep eyes expressed a quiet sadness as thoughhe felt, through her happiness, that there is another sort ofappiness unattainable in this life and of which she involuntarilyhought at that instant.EP1|CH10
	CHAPTER X
	Natasha had married in the early spring of 1813, and in 1820 alreadyad three daughters besides a son for whom she had longed and whom sheas now nursing. She had grown stouter and broader, so that it wasifficult to recognize in this robust, motherly woman the slim, livelyatasha of former days. Her features were more defined and had a calm,oft, and serene expression. In her face there was none of thever-glowing animation that had formerly burned there andonstituted its charm. Now her face and body were of all that one saw,nd her soul was not visible at all. All that struck the eye was atrong, handsome, and fertile woman. The old fire very rarelyindled in her face now. That happened only when, as was the case thatay, her husband returned home, or a sick child was convalescent, orhen she and Countess Mary spoke of Prince Andrew (she never mentionedim to her husband, who she imagined was jealous of Prince Andrew'semory), or on the rare occasions when something happened to induceer to sing, a practice she had quite abandoned since her marriage. Athe rare moments when the old fire did kindle in her handsome, fullyeveloped body she was even more attractive than in former days.
	Since their marriage Natasha and her husband had lived in Moscow, inetersburg, on their estate near Moscow, or with her mother, that iso say, in Nicholas' house. The young Countess Bezukhova was not ofteneen in society, and those who met her there were not pleased with hernd found her neither attractive nor amiable. Not that Natasha likedolitude- she did not know whether she liked it or not, she evenhought that she did not- but with her pregnancies, heronfinements, the nursing of her children, and sharing every moment ofer husband's life, she had demands on her time which could beatisfied only by renouncing society. All who had known Natasha beforeer marriage wondered at the change in her as at somethingxtraordinary. Only the old countess with her maternal instinct hadealized that all Natasha's outbursts had been due to her need ofhildren and a husband- as she herself had once exclaimed attradnoe not so much in fun as in earnest- and her mother was nowurprised at the surprise expressed by those who had nevernderstood Natasha, and she kept saying that she had always known thatatasha would make an exemplary wife and mother.
	"Only she lets her love of her husband and children overflow allounds," said the countess, "so that it even becomes absurd."
	Natasha did not follow the golden rule advocated by clever folk,specially by the French, which says that a girl should not leterself go when she marries, should not neglect her accomplishments,hould be even more careful of her appearance than when she wasnmarried, and should fascinate her husband as much as she didefore he became her husband. Natasha on the contrary had at oncebandoned all her witchery, of which her singing had been an unusuallyowerful part. She gave it up just because it was so powerfullyeductive. She took no pains with her manners or with of speech, orith her toilet, or to show herself to her husband in her mostecoming attitudes, or to avoid inconveniencing him by being tooxacting. She acted in contradiction to all those rules. She felt thathe allurements instinct had formerly taught her to use would now beerely ridiculous in the eyes of her husband, to whom she had from theirst moment given herself up entirely- that is, with her wholeoul, leaving no corner of it hidden from him. She felt that her unityith her husband was not maintained by the poetic feelings that hadttracted him to her, but by something else- indefinite but firm ashe bond between her own body and soul.
	To fluff out her curls, put on fashionable dresses, and singomantic songs to fascinate her husband would have seemed as stranges to adorn herself to attract herself. To adorn herself for othersight perhaps have been agreeable- she did not know- but she had noime at all for it. The chief reason for devoting no time either toinging, to dress, or to choosing her words was that she really had noime to spare for these things.
	We know that man has the faculty of becoming completely absorbedn a subject however trivial it may be, and that there is no subjecto trivial that it will not grow to infinite proportions if one'sntire attention is devoted to it.
	The subject which wholly engrossed Natasha's attention was heramily: that is, her husband whom she had to keep so that he shouldelong entirely to her and to the home, and the children whom shead to bear, bring into the world, nurse, and bring up.
	And the deeper she penetrated, not with her mind only but with herhole soul, her whole being, into the subject that absorbed her, thearger did that subject grow and the weaker and more inadequate dider powers appear, so that she concentrated them wholly on that onehing and yet was unable to accomplish all that she consideredecessary.
	There were then as now conversations and discussions about women'sights, the relations of husband and wife and their freedom andights, though these themes were not yet termed questions as theyre now; but these topics were not merely uninteresting to Natasha,he positively did not understand them.
	These questions, then as now, existed only for those who see nothingn marriage but the pleasure married people get from one another, thats, only the beginnings of marriage and not its whole significance,hich lies in the family.
	Discussions and questions of that kind, which are like theuestion of how to get the greatest gratification from one's dinner,id not then and do not now exist for those for whom the purpose of dinner is the nourishment it affords; and the purpose of marriage ishe family.
	If the purpose of dinner is to nourish the body, a man who eatswo dinners at once may perhaps get more enjoyment but will not attainis purpose, for his stomach will not digest the two dinners.
	If the purpose of marriage is the family, the person who wishes toave many wives or husbands may perhaps obtain much pleasure, but inhat case will not have a family.
	If the purpose of food is nourishment and the purpose of marriage ishe family, the whole question resolves itself into not eating morehan one can digest, and not having more wives or husbands than areeeded for the family- that is, one wife or one husband. Natashaeeded a husband. A husband was given her and he gave her a family.nd she not only saw no need of any other or better husband, but asll the powers of her soul were intent on serving that husband andamily, she could not imagine and saw no interest in imagining howt would be if things were different.
	Natasha did not care for society in general, but prized the more theociety of her relatives- Countess Mary, and her brother, herother, and Sonya. She valued the company of those to whom she couldome striding disheveled from the nursery in her dressing gown, andith joyful face show a yellow instead of a green stain on baby'sapkin, and from whom she could hear reassuring words to the effecthat baby was much better.
	To such an extent had Natasha let herself go that the way sheressed and did her hair, her ill-chosen words, and her jealousy-he was jealous of Sonya, of the governess, and of every woman, prettyr plain- were habitual subjects of jest to those about her. Theeneral opinion was that Pierre was under his wife's thumb, whichas really true. From the very first days of their married lifeatasha had announced her demands. Pierre was greatly surprised by hisife's view, to him a perfectly novel one, that every moment of hisife belonged to her and to the family. His wife's demandsstonished him, but they also flattered him, and he submitted to them.
	Pierre's subjection consisted in the fact that he not only dared notlirt with, but dared not even speak smilingly to, any other woman;id not dare dine at the Club as a pastime, did not dare spend money ahim, and did not dare absent himself for any length of time, exceptn business- in which his wife included his intellectual pursuits,hich she did not in the least understand but to which shettributed great importance. To make up for this, at home Pierre hadhe right to regulate his life and that of the whole family exactly ase chose. At home Natasha placed herself in the position of a slave toer husband, and the whole household went on tiptoe when he wasccupied- that is, was reading or writing in his study. Pierre had buto show a partiality for anything to get just what he liked donelways. He had only to express a wish and Natasha would jump up andun to fulfill it.
	The entire household was governed according to Pierre's supposedrders, that is, by his wishes which Natasha tried to guess. Their wayf life and place of residence, their acquaintances and ties,atasha's occupations, the children's upbringing, were all selectedot merely with regard to Pierre's expressed wishes, but to whatatasha from the thoughts he expressed in conversation supposed hisishes to be. And she deduced the essentials of his wishes quiteorrectly, and having once arrived at them clung to themenaciously. When Pierre himself wanted to change his mind she wouldight him with his own weapons.
	Thus in a time of trouble ever memorable to him after the birth ofheir first child who was delicate, when they had to change the weturse three times and Natasha fell ill from despair, Pierre one dayold her of Rousseau's view, with which he quite agreed, that toave a wet nurse is unnatural and harmful. When her next baby wasorn, despite the opposition of her mother, the doctors, and even ofer husband himself- who were all vigorously opposed to her nursinger baby herself, a thing then unheard of and considered injurious-he insisted on having her own way, and after that nursed all herabies herself.
	It very often happened that in a moment of irritation husband andife would have a dispute, but long afterwards Pierre to hisurprise and delight would find in his wife's ideas and actions theery thought against which she had argued, but divested ofverything superfluous that in the excitement of the dispute he haddded when expressing his opinion.
	After seven years of marriage Pierre had the joyous and firmonsciousness that he was not a bad man, and he felt this because heaw himself reflected in his wife. He felt the good and bad withinimself inextricably mingled and overlapping. But only what was reallyood in him was reflected in his wife, all that was not quite good wasejected. And this was not the result of logical reasoning but was airect and mysterious reflection.EP1|CH11
	CHAPTER XI
	Two months previously when Pierre was already staying with theostovs he had received a letter from Prince Theodore, asking him toome to Petersburg to confer on some important questions that wereeing discussed there by a society of which Pierre was one of therincipal founders.
	On reading that letter (she always read her husband's letters)atasha herself suggested that he should go to Petersburg, thoughhe would feel his absence very acutely. She attributed immensemportance to all her husband's intellectual and abstract interestshough she did not understand them, and she always dreaded being aindrance to him in such matters. To Pierre's timid look of inquiryfter reading the letter she replied by asking him to go, but to fix aefinite date for his return. He was given four weeks' leave ofbsence.
	Ever since that leave of absence had expired, more than aortnight before, Natasha had been in a constant state of alarm,epression, and irritability.
	Denisov, now a general on the retired list and much dissatisfiedith the present state of affairs, had arrived during thatortnight. He looked at Natasha with sorrow and surprise as at a badikeness of a person once dear. A dull, dejected look, random replies,nd talk about the nursery was all he saw and heard from his formernchantress.
	Natasha was sad and irritable all that time, especially when herother, her brother, Sonya, or Countess Mary in their efforts toonsole her tried to excuse Pierre and suggested reasons for his delayn returning.
	"It's all nonsense, all rubbish- those discussions which lead toothing and all those idiotic societies!" Natasha declared of the veryffairs in the immense importance of which she firmly believed.
	And she would go to the nursery to nurse Petya, her only boy. No onelse could tell her anything so comforting or so reasonable as thisittle three-month-old creature when he lay at her breast and sheas conscious of the movement of his lips and the snuffling of hisittle nose. That creature said: "You are angry, you are jealous,ou would like to pay him out, you are afraid- but here am I! And I ame..." and that was unanswerable. It was more than true.
	During that fortnight of anxiety Natasha resorted to the baby foromfort so often, and fussed over him so much, that she overfed himnd he fell ill. She was terrified by his illness, and yet that wasust what she needed. While attending to him she bore the anxietybout her husband more easily.
	She was nursing her boy when the sound of Pierre's sleigh waseard at the front door, and the old nurse- knowing how to pleaseer mistress- entered the room inaudibly but hurriedly and with aeaming face.
	"Has he come?" Natasha asked quickly in a whisper, afraid to moveest she should rouse the dozing baby.
	"He's come, ma'am," whispered the nurse.
	The blood rushed to Natasha's face and her feet involuntarily moved,ut she could not jump up and run out. The baby again opened hisyes and looked at her. "You're here?" he seemed to be saying, andgain lazily smacked his lips.
	Cautiously withdrawing her breast, Natasha rocked him a little,anded him to the nurse, and went with rapid steps toward the door.ut at the door she stopped as if her conscience reproached her foraving in her joy left the child too soon, and she glanced round.he nurse with raised elbows was lifting the infant over the rail ofis cot.
	"Go, ma'am! Don't worry, go!" she whispered, smiling, with theind of familiarity that grows up between a nurse and her mistress.
	Natasha ran with light footsteps to the anteroom.
	Denisov, who had come out of the study into the dancing room withis pipe, now for the first time recognized the old Natasha. A floodf brilliant, joyful light poured from her transfigured face.
	"He's come!" she exclaimed as she ran past, and Denisov felt that heoo was delighted that Pierre, whom he did not much care for, hadeturned.
	On reaching the vestibule Natasha saw a tall figure in a fur coatnwinding his scarf. "It's he! It's really he! He has come!" sheaid to herself, and rushing at him embraced him, pressed his heado her breast, and then pushed him back and gazed at his ruddy,appy face, covered with hoarfrost. "Yes, it is he, happy andontented..."
	Then all at once she remembered the tortures of suspense she hadxperienced for the last fortnight, and the joy that had lit up herace vanished; she frowned and overwhelmed Pierre with a torrent ofeproaches and angry words.
	"Yes, it's all very well for you. You are pleased, you've had a goodime.... But what about me? You might at least have shownonsideration for the children. I am nursing and my milk waspoiled.... Petya was at death's door. But you were enjoying yourself.es, enjoying..."
	Pierre knew he was not to blame, for he could not have comeooner; he knew this outburst was unseemly and would blow over in ainute or two; above all he knew that he himself was bright and happy.e wanted to smile but dared not even think of doing so. He made aiteous, frightened face and bent down.
	"I could not, on my honor. But how is Petya?"
	"All right now. Come along! I wonder you're not ashamed! If only youould see what I was like without you, how I suffered!"
	"You are well?"
	"Come, come!" she said, not letting go of his arm. And they wento their rooms.
	When Nicholas and his wife came to look for Pierre he was in theursery holding his baby son, who was again awake, on his huge rightalm and dandling him. A blissful bright smile was fixed on the baby'sroad face with its toothless open mouth. The storm was long sincever and there was bright, joyous sunshine on Natasha's face as sheazed tenderly at her husband and child.
	"And have you talked everything well over with Prince Theodore?" shesked.
	"Yes, capitally."
	"You see, he holds it up." (She meant the baby's head.) "But howe did frighten me... You've seen the princess? Is it true she's inove with that..."
	"Yes, just fancy..."
	At that moment Nicholas and Countess Mary came in. Pierre with theaby on his hand stooped, kissed them, and replied to their inquiries.ut in spite of much that was interesting and had to be discussed, theaby with the little cap on its unsteady head evidently absorbed allis attention.
	"How sweet!" said Countess Mary, looking at and playing with theaby. "Now, Nicholas," she added, turning to her husband, "I can'tnderstand how it is you don't see the charm of these deliciousarvels."
	"I don't and can't," replied Nicholas, looking coldly at the baby.A lump of flesh. Come along, Pierre!"
	"And yet he's such an affectionate father," said Countess Mary,indicating her husband, "but only after they are a year old or so..."
	"Now, Pierre nurses them splendidly," said Natasha. "He says hisand is just made for a baby's seat. Just look!"
	"Only not for this..." Pierre suddenly exclaimed with a laugh, andhifting the baby he gave him to the nurse.EP1|CH12
	CHAPTER XII
	As in every large household, there were at Bald Hills severalerfectly distinct worlds which merged into one harmonious whole,hough each retained its own peculiarities and made concessions to thethers. Every event, joyful or sad, that took place in that houseas important to all these worlds, but each had its own specialeasons to rejoice or grieve over that occurrence independently of thethers.
	For instance, Pierre's return was a joyful and important event andhey all felt it to be so.
	The servants- the most reliable judges of their masters because theyudge not by their conversation or expressions of feeling but by theircts and way of life- were glad of Pierre's return because they knewhat when he was there Count Nicholas would cease going every dayttend to the estate, and would would be in better spirits and temper,nd also because they would all receive handsome presents for theolidays.
	The children and their governesses were glad of Pierre's returnecause no one else drew them into the social life of the household ase did. He alone could play on the clavichord that ecossaise (his onlyiece) to which, as he said, all possible dances could be danced,nd they felt sure he had brought presents for them all.
	Young Nicholas, now a slim lad of fifteen, delicate and intelligent,ith curly light-brown hair and beautiful eyes, was delightedecause Uncle Pierre as he called him was the object of hisapturous and passionate affection. No one had instilled into him thisove for Pierre whom he saw only occasionally. Countess Mary who hadrought him up had done her utmost to make him love her husband as sheoved him, and little Nicholas did love his uncle, but loved himith just a shade of contempt. Pierre, however, he adored. He didot want to be an hussar or a Knight of St. George like his uncleicholas; he wanted to be learned, wise, and kind like Pierre. Inierre's presence his face always shone with pleasure and he flushednd was breathless when Pierre spoke to him. He did not miss aingle word he uttered, and would afterwards, with Dessalles or byimself, recall and reconsider the meaning of everything Pierre hadaid. Pierre's past life and his unhappiness prior to 1812 (of whichoung Nicholas had formed a vague poetic picture from some words head overheard), his adventures in Moscow, his captivity, Platonarataev (of whom he had heard from Pierre), his love for Natashaof whom the lad was also particularly fond), and especiallyierre's friendship with the father whom Nicholas could notemember- all this made Pierre in his eyes a hero and a saint.
	From broken remarks about Natasha and his father, from the emotionith which Pierre spoke of that dead father, and from the careful,everent tenderness with which Natasha spoke of him, the boy, whoas only just beginning to guess what love is, derived the notion thatis father had loved Natasha and when dying had left her to hisriend. But the father whom the boy did not remember appeared to him aivinity who could not be pictured, and of whom he never thoughtithout a swelling heart and tears of sadness and rapture. So theoy also was happy that Pierre had arrived.
	The guests welcomed Pierre because he always helped to enliven andnite any company he was in.
	The grown-up members of the family, not to mention his wife, wereleased to have back a friend whose presence made life run moremoothly and peacefully.
	The old ladies were pleased with the presents he brought them, andspecially that Natasha would now be herself again.
	Pierre felt the different outlooks of these various worlds andade haste to satisfy all their expectations.
	Though the most absent-minded and forgetful of men, Pierre, with theid of a list his wife drew up, had now bought everything, notorgetting his mother- and brother-in-law's commissions, nor the dressaterial for a present to Belova, nor toys for his wife's nephews.n the early days of his marriage it had seemed strange to him thatis wife should expect him not to forget to procure all the thingse undertook to buy, and he had been taken aback by her seriousnnoyance when on his first trip he forgot everything. But in timee grew used to this demand. Knowing that Natasha asked nothing forerself, and gave him commissions for others only when he himselfad offered to undertake them, he now found an unexpected andhildlike pleasure in this purchase of presents for everyone in theouse, and never forgot anything. If he now incurred Natasha's censuret was only for buying too many and too expensive things. To her otherefects (as most people thought them, but which to Pierre wereualities) of untidiness and neglect of herself, she now addedtinginess.
	From the time that Pierre began life as a family man on a footingntailing heavy expenditure, he had noticed to his surprise that hepent only half as much as before, and that his affairs- which hadeen in disorder of late, chiefly because of his first wife's debts-ad begun to improve.
	Life was cheaper because it was circumscribed: that most expensiveuxury, the kind of life that can be changed at any moment, was noonger his nor did he wish for it. He felt that his way of life hadow been settled once for all till death and that to change it was notn his power, and so that way of life proved economical.
	With a merry, smiling face Pierre was sorting his purchases.
	"What do you think of this?" said he, unrolling a piece of stuffike a shopman.
	Natasha, who was sitting opposite to him with her eldest daughter oner lap, turned her sparkling eyes swiftly from her husband to thehings he showed her.
	"That's for Belova? Excellent!" She felt the quality of theaterial. "It was a ruble an arshin, I suppose?"
	Pierre told her the price.
	"Too dear!" Natasha remarked. "How pleased the children will bend Mamma too! Only you need not have bought me this," she added,nable to suppress a smile as she gazed admiringly at a gold combet with pearls, of a kind then just coming into fashion.
	"Adele tempted me: she kept on telling me to buy it," returnedierre.
	"When am I to wear it?" and Natasha stuck it in her coil of hair.When I take little Masha into society? Perhaps they will beashionable again by then. Well, let's go now."
	And collecting the presents they went first to the nursery andhen to the old countess' rooms.
	The countess was sitting with her companion Belova, playingrand-patience as usual, when Pierre and Natasha came into the drawingoom with parcels under their arms.
	The countess was now over sixty, was quite gray, and wore a cap with frill that surrounded her face. Her face had shriveled, her upperip had sunk in, and her eyes were dim.
	After the deaths of her son and husband in such rapid succession,he felt herself a being accidentally forgotten in this world and leftithout aim or object for her existence. She ate, drank, slept, orept awake, but did not live. Life gave her no new impressions. Sheanted nothing from life but tranquillity, and that tranquillitynly death could give her. But until death came she had to go oniving, that is, to use her vital forces. A peculiarity one sees inery young children and very old people was particularly evident iner. Her life had no external aims- only a need to exercise herarious functions and inclinations was apparent. She had to eat,leep, think, speak, weep, work, give vent to her anger, and so on,erely because she had a stomach, a brain, muscles, nerves, and aiver. She did these things not under any external impulse as peoplen the full vigor of life do, when behind the purpose for which theytrive that of exercising their functions remains unnoticed. Shealked only because she physically needed to exercise her tongue andungs. She cried as a child does, because her nose had to beleared, and so on. What for people in their full vigor is an aimas for her evidently merely a pretext.
	Thus in the morning- especially if she had eaten anything rich theay before- she felt a need of being angry and would choose as theandiest pretext Belova's deafness.
	She would begin to say something to her in a low tone from the othernd of the room.
	"It seems a little warmer today, my dear," she would murmur.
	And when Belova replied: "Oh yes, they've come," she would mutterngrily: "O Lord! How stupid and deaf she is!"
	Another pretext would be her snuff, which would seem too dry oroo damp or not rubbed fine enough. After these fits of irritabilityer face would grow yellow, and her maids knew by infallibleymptoms when Belova would again be deaf, the snuff damp, and theountess' face yellow. Just as she needed to work off her spleen sohe had sometimes to exercise her still-existing faculty ofhinking- and the pretext for that was a game of patience. When sheeeded to cry, the deceased count would be the pretext. When sheanted to be agitated, Nicholas and his health would be the pretext,nd when she felt a need to speak spitefully, the pretext would beountess Mary. When her vocal organs needed exercise, which wassually toward seven o'clock when she had had an after-dinner restn a darkened room, the pretext would be the retelling of the sametories over and over again to the same audience.
	The old lady's condition was understood by the whole householdhough no one ever spoke of it, and they all made every possibleffort to satisfy her needs. Only by a rare glance exchanged with aad smile between Nicholas, Pierre, Natasha, and Countess Mary was theommon understanding of her condition expressed.
	But those glances expressed something more: they said that she hadlayed her part in life, that what they now saw was not her wholeelf, that we must all become like her, and that they were glad toield to her, to restrain themselves for this once precious beingormerly as full of life as themselves, but now so much to beitied. "Memento mori," said these glances.
	Only the really heartless, the stupid ones of that household, andhe little children failed to understand this and avoided her.EP1|CH13
	CHAPTER XIII
	When Pierre and his wife entered the drawing room the countess wasn one of her customary states in which she needed the mental exertionf playing patience, and so- though by force of habit she greetedim with the words she always used when Pierre or her son returnedfter an absence: "High time, my dear, high time! We were all weary ofaiting for you. Well, thank God!" and received her presents withnother customary remark: "It's not the gift that's precious, my dear,ut that you give it to me, an old woman..."- yet it was evidenthat she was not pleased by Pierre's arrival at that moment when itiverted her attention from the unfinished game.
	She finished her game of patience and only then examined theresents. They consisted of a box for cards, of splendidorkmanship, a bright-blue Sevres tea cup with shepherdessesepicted on it and with a lid, and a gold snuffbox with the count'sortrait on the lid which Pierre had had done by a miniaturist inetersburg. The countess had long wished for such a box, but as sheid not want to cry just then she glanced indifferently at theortrait and gave her attention chiefly to the box for cards.
	"Thank you, my dear, you have cheered me up," said she as she alwaysid. "But best of all you have brought yourself back- for I neveraw anything like it, you ought to give your wife a scolding! What aree to do with her? She is like a mad woman when you are away.oesn't see anything, doesn't remember anything," she went on,epeating her usual phrases. "Look, Anna Timofeevna," she added to herompanion, "see what a box for cards my son has brought us!"
	Belova admired the presents and was delighted with her dressaterial.
	Though Pierre, Natasha, Nicholas, Countess Mary, and Denisov haduch to talk about that they could not discuss before the oldountess- not that anything was hidden from her, but because she hadropped so far behindhand in many things that had they begun toonverse in her presence they would have had to answer inopportuneuestions and to repeat what they had already told her many times:hat so-and-so was dead and so-and-so was married, which she wouldgain be unable to remember- yet they sat at tea round the samovarn the drawing room from habit, and Pierre answered the countess'uestions as to whether Prince Vasili had aged and whether Countessary Alexeevna had sent greetings and still thought of them, and otheratters that interested no one and to which she herself wasndifferent.
	Conversation of this kind, interesting to no one yet unavoidable,ontinued all through teatime. All the grown-up members of theamily were assembled near the round tea table at which Sonya presidedeside the samovar. The children with their tutors and governesses hadad tea and their voices were audible from the next room. At tea allat in their accustomed places: Nicholas beside the stove at a smallable where his tea was handed to him; Milka, the old gray borzoiitch (daughter of the first Milka), with a quite gray face andarge black eyes that seemed more prominent than ever, lay on thermchair beside him; Denisov, whose curly hair, mustache, and whiskersad turned half gray, sat beside countess Mary with his general'sunic unbuttoned; Pierre sat between his wife and the old countess. Hepoke of what he knew might interest the old lady and that she couldnderstand. He told her of external social events and of the peopleho had formed the circle of her contemporaries and had once been aeal, living, and distinct group, but who were now for the most partcattered about the world and like herself were garnering the lastars of the harvests they had sown in earlier years. But to the oldountess those contemporaries of hers seemed to be the only seriousnd real society. Natasha saw by Pierre's animation that his visit hadeen interesting and that he had much to tell them but dare not say itefore the old countess. Denisov, not being a member of the family,id not understand Pierre's caution and being, as a malcontent, muchnterested in what was occurring in Petersburg, kept urging Pierreo tell them about what had happened in the Semenovsk regiment, thenbout Arakcheev, and then about the Bible Society. Once or twiceierre was carried away and began to speak of these things, buticholas and Natasha always brought him back to the health of Princevan and Countess Mary Alexeevna.
	"Well, and all this idiocy- Gossner and Tatawinova?" Denisovsked. "Is that weally still going on?"
	"Going on?" Pierre exclaimed. "Why more than ever! The Bible Societys the whole government now!"
	 "What is that, mon cher ami?" asked the countess, who hadinished her tea and evidently needed a pretext for being angryfter her meal. "What are you saying about the government? I don'tnderstand."
	"Well, you know, Maman," Nicholas interposed, knowing how toranslate things into his mother's language, "Prince Alexanderolitsyn has founded a society and in consequence has great influence,hey say."
	"Arakcheev and Golitsyn," incautiously remarked Pierre, "are now thehole government! And what a government! They see treason everywherend are afraid of everything."
	"Well, and how is Prince Alexander to blame? He is a moststimable man. I used to meet him at Mary Antonovna's," said theountess in an offended tone; and still more offended that they allemained silent, she went on: "Nowadays everyone finds fault. A Gospelociety! Well, and what harm is there in that?" and she roseeverybody else got up too) and with a severe expression sailed backo her table in the sitting room.
	The melancholy silence that followed was broken by the sounds of thehildren's voices and laughter from the next room. Evidently someolly excitement was going on there.
	"Finished, finished!" little Natasha's gleeful yell rose abovehem all.
	Pierre exchanged glances with Countess Mary and Nicholas (Natasha heever lost sight of) and smiled happily.
	"That's delightful music!" said he.
	"It means that Anna Makarovna has finished her stocking," saidountess Mary.
	"Oh, I'll go and see," said Pierre, jumping up. "You know," hedded, stopping at the door, "why I'm especially fond of that music?t is always the first thing that tells me all is well. When I wasriving here today, the nearer I got to the house the more anxious Irew. As I entered the anteroom I heard Andrusha's peals of laughternd that meant that all was well."
	"I know! I know that feeling," said Nicholas. "But I mustn't gohere- those stockings are to be a surprise for me."
	Pierre went to the children, and the shouting and laughter grewtill louder.
	"Come, Anna Makarovna," Pierre's voice was heard saying, "comeere into the middle of the room and at the word of command, 'One,wo,' and when I say 'three'... You stand here, and you in my arms-ell now! One, two!..." said Pierre, and a silence followed:three!" and a rapturously breathless cry of children's voicesilled the room. "Two, two!" they shouted.
	This meant two stockings, which by a secret process known only toerself Anna Makarovna used to knit at the same time on the sameeedles, and which, when they were ready, she always triumphantlyrew, one out of the other, in the children's presence.EP1|CH14
	CHAPTER XIV
	Soon after this the children came in to say good night. Theyissed everyone, the tutors and governesses made their bows, andhey went out. Only young Nicholas and his tutor remained. Dessalleshispered to the boy to come downstairs.
	"No, Monsieur Dessalles, I will ask my aunt to let me stay," repliedicholas Bolkonski also in a whisper.
	"Ma tante, please let me stay," said he, going up to his aunt.
	His face expressed entreaty, agitation, and ecstasy. Countess Marylanced at him and turned to Pierre.
	"When you are here he can't tear himself away," she said.
	"I will bring him to you directly, Monsieur Dessalles. Goodight!" said Pierre, giving his hand to the Swiss tutor, and he turnedo young Nicholas with a smile. "You and I haven't seen anything ofne another yet... How like he is growing, Mary!" he added, addressingountess Mary.
	"Like my father?" asked the boy, flushing crimson and looking upt Pierre with bright, ecstatic eyes.
	Pierre nodded, and went on with what he had been saying when thehildren had interrupted. Countess Mary sat down doing woolwork;atasha did not take her eyes off her husband. Nicholas and Denisovose, asked for their pipes, smoked, went to fetch more tea fromonya- who sat weary but resolute at the samovar- and questionedierre. The curly-headed, delicate boy sat with shining eyes unnoticedn a corner, starting every now and then and muttering something toimself, and evidently experiencing a new and powerful emotion as heurned his curly head, with his thin neck exposed by his turn-downollar, toward the place where Pierre sat.
	The conversation turned on the contemporary gossip about those inower, in which most people see the chief interest of home politics.enisov, dissatisfied with the government on account of his ownisappointments in the service, heard with pleasure of the things donen Petersburg which seemed to him stupid, and made forcible andharp comments on what Pierre told them.
	"One used to have to be a German- now one must dance with Tatawinovand Madame Kwudener, and wead Ecka'tshausen and the bwethwen. Oh, theyhould let that fine fellow Bonaparte lose- he'd knock all thisonsense out of them! Fancy giving the command of the Semenov wegimento a fellow like that Schwa'tz!" he cried.
	Nicholas, though free from Denisov's readiness to find fault withverything, also thought that discussion of the government was aery serious and weighty matter, and the fact that A had beenppointed Minister of This and B Governor General of That, and thathe Emperor had said so-and-so and this minister so-and-so, seemedo him very important. And so he thought it necessary to take annterest in these things and to question Pierre. The questions puty these two kept the conversation from changing its ordinaryharacter of gossip about the higher government circles.
	But Natasha, knowing all her husband's ways and ideas, saw that head long been wishing but had been unable to divert the conversationo another channel and express his own deeply felt idea for the sakef which he had gone to Petersburg to consult with his new friendrince Theodore, and she helped him by asking how his affairs withrince Theodore had gone.
	"What was it about?" asked Nicholas.
	"Always the same thing," said Pierre, looking round at hisisteners. "Everybody sees that things are going so badly that theyannot be allowed to go on so and that it is the duty of all decenten to counteract it as far as they can."
	"What can decent men do?" Nicholas inquired, frowning slightly.What can be done?"
	"Why, this..."
	"Come into my study," said Nicholas.
	Natasha, who had long expected to be fetched to nurse her baby,ow heard the nurse calling her and went to the nursery. Countess Maryollowed her. The men went into the study and little Nicholasolkonski followed them unnoticed by his uncle and sat down at theriting table in a shady corner by the window.
	"Well, what would you do?" asked Denisov.
	"Always some fantastic schemes," said Nicholas.
	"Why this," began Pierre, not sitting down but pacing the room,ometimes stopping short, gesticulating, and lisping: "the position inetersburg is this: the Emperor does not look into anything. He hasbandoned himself altogether to this mysticism" (Pierre could notolerate mysticism in anyone now). "He seeks only for peace, andnly these people sans foi ni loi* can give it him- people whoecklessly hack at and strangle everything- Magnitski, Arakcheev,nd tutti quanti.... You will agree that if you did not look afterour estates yourself but only wanted a quiet life, the harsher yourteward was the more readily your object might be attained," he saido Nicholas.
	*Without faith or law.
	"Well, what does that lead up to?" said Nicholas.
	"Well, everything is going to ruin! Robbery in the law courts, inhe army nothing but flogging, drilling, and Military Settlements; theeople are tortured, enlightenment is suppressed. All that is youngnd honest is crushed! Everyone sees that this cannot go on.verything is strained to such a degree that it will certainly break,"aid Pierre (as those who examine the actions of any government havelways said since governments began). "I told them just one thing inetersburg."
	"Told whom?"
	"Well, you know whom," said Pierre, with a meaning glance from underis brows. "Prince Theodore and all those. To encourage culture andhilanthropy is all very well of course. The aim is excellent but inhe present circumstances something else is needed."
	At that moment Nicholas noticed the presence of his nephew. His facearkened and he went up to the boy.
	"Why are you here?"
	"Why? Let him be," said Pierre, taking Nicholas by the arm andontinuing. "That is not enough, I told them. Something else iseeded. When you stand expecting the overstrained string to snap atny moment, when everyone is expecting the inevitable catastrophe,s many as possible must join hands as closely as they can toithstand the general calamity. Everything that is young and strong iseing enticed away and depraved. One is lured by women, another byonors, a third by ambition or money, and they go over to that camp.o independent men, such as you or I, are left. What I say is widenhe scope of our society, let the mot d'ordre be not virtue aloneut independence and action as well!"
	Nicholas, who had left his nephew, irritably pushed up anrmchair, sat down in it, and listened to Pierre, coughingiscontentedly and frowning more and more.
	"But action with what aim?" he cried. "And what position will youdopt toward the government?"
	"Why, the position of assistants. The society need not be secretf the government allows it. Not merely is it not hostile toovernment, but it is a society of true conservatives- a society ofentlemen in the full meaning of that word. It is only to prevent someugachev or other from killing my children and yours, and Arakcheevrom sending me off to some Military Settlement. We join hands onlyor the public welfare and the general safety."
	"Yes, but it's a secret society and therefore a hostile andarmful one which can only cause harm."
	"Why? Did the Tugendbund which saved Europe" (they did not thenenture to suggest that Russia had saved Europe) "do any harm? Theugendbund is an alliance of virtue: it is love, mutual help... its what Christ preached on the Cross."
	Natasha, who had come in during the conversation, looked joyfully ater husband. It was not what he was saying that pleased her- thatid not even interest her, for it seemed to her that was all extremelyimple and that she had known it a long time (it seemed so to herecause she knew that it sprang from Pierre's whole soul), but itas his animated and enthusiastic appearance that made her glad.
	The boy with the thin neck stretching out from the turn-down collar-hom everyone had forgotten- gazed at Pierre with even greater andore rapturous joy. Every word of Pierre's burned into his heart,nd with a nervous movement of his fingers he unconsciously brokehe sealing wax and quill pens his hands came upon on his uncle'sable.
	"It is not at all what you suppose; but that is what the Germanugendbund was, and what I am proposing."
	"No, my fwiend! The Tugendbund is all vewy well for the sausageaters, but I don't understand it and can't even pwonounce it,"nterposed Denisov in a loud and resolute voice. "I agwee thatvewything here is wotten and howwible, but the Tugendbund I don'tnderstand. If we're not satisfied, let us have a bunt of our own.hat's all wight. Je suis vot'e homme!"*
	*"I'm your man."
	Pierre smiled, Natasha began to laugh, but Nicholas knitted hisrows still more and began proving to Pierre that there was norospect of any great change and that all the danger he spoke ofxisted only in his imagination. Pierre maintained the contrary, ands his mental faculties were greater and more resourceful, Nicholaselt himself cornered. This made him still angrier, for he was fullyonvinced, not by reasoning but by something within him strongerhan reason, of the justice of his opinion.
	"I will tell you this," he said, rising and trying with nervouslywitching fingers to prop up his pipe in a corner, but finallybandoning the attempt. "I can't prove it to you. You say thatverything here is rotten and that an overthrow is coming: I don't seet. But you also say that our oath of allegiance is a conditionalatter, and to that I reply: 'You are my best friend, as you know, butf you formed a secret society and began working against theovernment- be it what it may- I know it is my duty to obey theovernment. And if Arakcheev ordered me to lead a squadron against yound cut you down, I should not hesitate an instant, but should do it.'nd you may argue about that as you like!"
	An awkward silence followed these words. Natasha was the first topeak, defending her husband and attacking her brother. Her defenseas weak and inapt but she attained her object. The conversation wasesumed, and no longer in the unpleasantly hostile tone of Nicholas'ast remark.
	When they all got up to go in to supper, little Nicholas Bolkonskient up to Pierre, pale and with shining, radiant eyes.
	"Uncle Pierre, you... no... If Papa were alive... would he agreeith you?" he asked.
	And Pierre suddenly realized what a special, independent, complex,nd powerful process of thought and feeling must have been going on inhis boy during that conversation, and remembering all he had saide regretted that the lad should have heard him. He had, however, toive him an answer.
	"Yes, I think so," he said reluctantly, and left the study.
	The lad looked down and seemed now for the first time to notice whate had done to the things on the table. He flushed and went up toicholas.
	"Uncle, forgive me, I did that... unintentionally," he said,ointing to the broken sealing wax and pens.
	Nicholas started angrily.
	"All right, all right," he said, throwing the bits under the table.
	And evidently suppressing his vexation with difficulty, he turnedway from the boy.
	"You ought not to have been here at all," he said.EP1|CH15
	CHAPTER XV
	The conversation at supper was not about politics or societies,ut turned on the subject Nicholas liked best- recollections of812. Denisov started these and Pierre was particularly agreeablend amusing about them. The family separated on the most friendlyerms.
	After supper Nicholas, having undressed in his study and givennstructions to the steward who had been waiting for him, went tohe bedroom in his dressing gown, where he found his wife still at herable, writing.
	"What are you writing, Mary?" Nicholas asked.
	Countess Mary blushed. She was afraid that what she was writingould not be understood or approved by her husband.
	She had wanted to conceal what she was writing from him, but athe same time was glad he had surprised her at it and that she wouldow have to tell him.
	"A diary, Nicholas," she replied, handing him a blue exercise bookilled with her firm, bold writing.
	"A diary?" Nicholas repeated with a shade of irony, and he took uphe book.
	It was in French.
	December 4. Today when Andrusha (her eldest boy) woke up he didot wish to dress and Mademoiselle Louise sent for me. He wasaughty and obstinate. I tried threats, but he only grew angrier. Then took the matter in hand: I left him alone and began with nurse'selp to get the other children up, telling him that I did not loveim. For a long time he was silent, as if astonished, then he jumpedut of bed, ran to me in his shirt, and sobbed so that I could notalm him for a long time. It was plain that what troubled him most washat he had grieved me. Afterwards in the evening when I gave himis ticket, he again began crying piteously and kissing me. One can donything with him by tenderness.
	"What is a 'ticket'?" Nicholas inquired.
	"I have begun giving the elder ones marks every evening, showing howhey have behaved."
	Nicholas looked into the radiant eyes that were gazing at him, andontinued to turn over the pages and read. In the diary was set downverything in the children's lives that seemed noteworthy to theirother as showing their characters or suggesting general reflectionsn educational methods. They were for the most part quitensignificant trifles, but did not seem so to the mother or to theather either, now that he read this diary about his children forhe first time.
	Under the date "5" was entered:
	Mitya was naughty at table. Papa said he was to have no pudding.e had none, but looked so unhappily and greedily at the othershile they were eating! I think that punishment by deprivinghildren of sweets only develops their greediness. Must tellicholas this.
	Nicholas put down the book and looked at his wife. The radiantyes gazed at him questioningly: would he approve or disapprove of heriary? There could be no doubt not only of his approval but also ofis admiration for his wife.
	Perhaps it need not be done so pedantically, thought Nicholas, orven done at all, but this untiring, continual spiritual effort ofhich the sole aim was the children's moral welfare delighted him. Hadicholas been able to analyze his feelings he would have found thatis steady, tender, and proud love of his wife rested on his feelingf wonder at her spirituality and at the lofty moral world, almosteyond his reach, in which she had her being.
	He was proud of her intelligence and goodness, recognized his ownnsignificance beside her in the spiritual world, and rejoiced all theore that she with such a soul not only belonged to him but was partf himself.
	"I quite, quite approve, my dearest!" said he with a significantook, and after a short pause he added: "And I behaved badly today.ou weren't in the study. We began disputing- Pierre and I- and I losty temper. But he is impossible: such a child! I don't know what wouldecome of him if Natasha didn't keep him in hand.... Have you any ideahy he went to Petersburg? They have formed..."
	"Yes, I know," said Countess Mary. "Natasha told me."
	"Well, then, you know," Nicholas went on, growing hot at the mereecollection of their discussion, "he wanted to convince me that it isvery honest man's duty to go against the government, and that theath of allegiance and duty... I am sorry you weren't there. Theyll fell on me- Denisov and Natasha... Natasha is absurd. How sheules over him! And yet there need only be a discussion and she has noords of her own but only repeats his sayings..." added Nicholas,ielding to that irresistible inclination which tempts us to judgehose nearest and dearest to us. He forgot that what he was sayingbout Natasha could have been applied word for word to himself inelation to his wife.
	"Yes, I have noticed that," said Countess Mary.
	"When I told him that duty and the oath were above everything, hetarted proving goodness knows what! A pity you were not there- whatould you have said?"
	"As I see it you were quite right, and I told Natasha so. Pierreays everybody is suffering, tortured, and being corrupted, and thatt is our duty to help our neighbor. Of course he is right there,"aid Countess Mary, "but he forgets that we have other duties nearero us, duties indicated to us by God Himself, and that though we mightxpose ourselves to risks we must not risk our children."
	"Yes, that's it! That's just what I said to him," put in Nicholas,ho fancied he really had said it. "But they insisted on their owniew: love of one's neighbor and Christianity- and all this in theresence of young Nicholas, who had gone into my study and broke ally things."
	"Ah, Nicholas, do you know I am often troubled about littleicholas," said Countess Mary. "He is such an exceptional boy. I amfraid I neglect him in favor of my own: we all have children andelations while he has no one. He is constantly alone with hishoughts."
	"Well, I don't think you need reproach yourself on his account.ll that the fondest mother could do for her son you have done and areoing for him, and of course I am glad of it. He is a fine lad, a finead! This evening he listened to Pierre in a sort of trance, andancy- as we were going in to supper I looked and he had brokenverything on my table to bits, and he told me of it himself atnce! I never knew him to tell an untruth. A fine lad, a fine lad!"epeated Nicholas, who at heart was not fond of Nicholas Bolkonski butas always anxious to recognize that he was a fine lad.
	"Still, I am not the same as his own mother," said Countess Mary. "Ieel I am not the same and it troubles me. A wonderful boy, but I amreadfully afraid for him. It would be good for him to haveompanions."
	"Well it won't be for long. Next summer I'll take him toetersburg," said Nicholas. "Yes, Pierre always was a dreamer andlways will be," he continued, returning to the talk in the studyhich had evidently disturbed him. "Well, what business is it ofine what goes on there- whether Arakcheev is bad, and all that?hat business was it of mine when I married and was so deep in debthat I was threatened with prison, and had a mother who could notee or understand it? And then there are you and the children andur affairs. Is it for my own pleasure that I am at the farm or in theffice from morning to night? No, but I know I must work to comfort myother, to repay you, and not to leave the children such beggars as was."
	Countess Mary wanted to tell him that man does not live by breadlone and that he attached too much importance to these matters. Buthe knew she must not say this and that it would be useless to doo. She only took his hand and kissed it. He took this as a sign ofpproval and a confirmation of his thoughts, and after a fewinutes' reflection continued to think aloud.
	"You know, Mary, today Elias Mitrofanych" (this was his overseer)came back from the Tambov estate and told me they are alreadyffering eighty thousand rubles for the forest."
	And with an eager face Nicholas began to speak of the possibility ofepurchasing Otradnoe before long, and added: "Another ten years ofife and I shall leave the children... in an excellent position."
	Countess Mary listened to her husband and understood all that heold her. She knew that when he thought aloud in this way he wouldometimes ask her what he had been saying, and be vexed if heoticed that she had been thinking about something else. But she hado force herself to attend, for what he was saying did not interester at all. She looked at him and did not think, but felt, aboutomething different. She felt a submissive tender love for this manho would never understand all that she understood, and this seemed toake her love for him still stronger and added a touch of passionateenderness. Besides this feeling which absorbed her altogether andindered her from following the details of her husband's plans,houghts that had no connection with what he was saying flittedhrough her mind. She thought of her nephew. Her husband's accountf the boy's agitation while Pierre was speaking struck herorcibly, and various traits of his gentle, sensitive characterecurred to her mind; and while thinking of her nephew she thoughtlso of her own children. She did not compare them with him, butompared her feeling for them with her feeling for him, and feltith regret that there was something lacking in her feeling foroung Nicholas.
	Sometimes it seemed to her that this difference arose from theifference in their ages, but she felt herself to blame toward him andromised in her heart to do better and to accomplish the impossible-n this life to love her husband, her children, little Nicholas, andll her neighbors, as Christ loved mankind. Countess Mary's soullways strove toward the infinite, the eternal, and the absolute,nd could therefore never be at peace. A stern expression of theofty, secret suffering of a soul burdened by the body appeared on herace. Nicholas gazed at her. "O God! What will become of us if sheies, as I always fear when her face is like that?" thought he, andlacing himself before the icon he began to say his evening prayers.EP1|CH16
	CHAPTER XVI
	Natasha and Pierre, left alone, also began to talk as only a husbandnd wife can talk, that is, with extraordinary clearness and rapidity,nderstanding and expressing each other's thoughts in ways contrary toll rules of logic, without premises, deductions, or conclusions,nd in a quite peculiar way. Natasha was so used to this kind ofalk with her husband that for her it was the surest sign of somethingeing wrong between them if Pierre followed a line of logicaleasoning. When he began proving anything, or talkingrgumentatively and calmly and she, led on by his example, began to dohe same, she knew that they were on the verge of a quarrel.
	From the moment they were alone and Natasha came up to him withide-open happy eyes, and quickly seizing his head pressed it to herosom, saying: "Now you are all mine, mine! You won't escape!"- fromhat moment this conversation began, contrary to all the laws of logicnd contrary to them because quite different subjects were talkedbout at one and the same time. This simultaneous discussion of manyopics did not prevent a clear understanding but on the contrary washe surest sign that they fully understood one another.
	Just as in a dream when all is uncertain, unreasoning, andontradictory, except the feeling that guides the dream, so in thisntercourse contrary to all laws of reason, the words themselvesere not consecutive and clear but only the feeling that promptedhem.
	Natasha spoke to Pierre about her brother's life and doings, ofow she had suffered and lacked life during his own absence, and ofow she was fonder than ever of Mary, and how Mary was in every wayetter than herself. In saying this Natasha was sincere incknowledging Mary's superiority, but at the same time by saying ithe made a demand on Pierre that he should, all the same, prefer hero Mary and to all other women, and that now, especially afteraving seen many women in Petersburg, he should tell her so afresh.
	Pierre, answering Natasha's words, told her how intolerable it hadeen for him to meet ladies at dinners and balls in Petersburg.
	"I have quite lost the knack of talking to ladies," he said. "It wasimply dull. Besides, I was very busy."
	Natasha looked intently at him and went on:
	"Mary is so splendid," she said. "How she understands children! Its as if she saw straight into their souls. Yesterday, for instance,itya was naughty..."
	"How like his father he is," Pierre interjected.
	Natasha knew why he mentioned Mitya's likeness to Nicholas: theecollection of his dispute with his brother-in-law was unpleasant ande wanted to know what Natasha thought of it.
	"Nicholas has the weakness of never agreeing with anything notenerally accepted. But I understand that you value what opens up aresh line," said she, repeating words Pierre had once uttered.
	"No, the chief point is that to Nicholas ideas and discussions aren amusement- almost a pastime," said Pierre. "For instance, he isollecting a library and has made it a rule not to buy a new book tille has read what he had already bought- Sismondi and Rousseau andontesquieu," he added with a smile. "You know how much I..." he begano soften down what he had said; but Natasha interrupted him to showhat this was unnecessary.
	"So you say ideas are an amusement to him...."
	"Yes, and for me nothing else is serious. All the time in Petersburg saw everyone as in a dream. When I am taken up by a thought, alllse is mere amusement."
	"Ah, I'm so sorry I wasn't there when you met the children," saidatasha. "Which was most delighted? Lisa, I'm sure."
	"Yes," Pierre replied, and went on with what was in his mind.Nicholas says we ought not to think. But I can't help it. Besides,hen I was in Petersburg I felt (I can this to you) that the wholeffair would go to pieces without me- everyone was pulling his ownay. But I succeeded in uniting them all; and then my idea is so clearnd simple. You see, I don't say that we ought to oppose this andhat. We may be mistaken. What I say is: 'Join hands, you who love theight, and let there be but one banner- that of active virtue.' Princeergey is a fine fellow and clever."
	Natasha would have had no doubt as to the greatness of Pierre'sdea, but one thing disconcerted her. "Can a man so important andecessary to society be also my husband? How did this happen?" Sheished to express this doubt to him. "Now who could decide whethere is really cleverer than all the others?" she asked herself, andassed in review all those whom Pierre most respected. Judging by whate had said there was no one he had respected so highly as Platonarataev.
	"Do you know what I am thinking about?" she asked. "About Platonarataev. Would he have approved of you now, do you think?"
	Pierre was not at all surprised at this question. He understoodis wife's line of thought.
	"Platon Karataev?" he repeated, and pondered, evidently sincerelyrying to imagine Karataev's opinion on the subject. "He would notave understood... yet perhaps he would."
	"I love you awfully!" Natasha suddenly said. "Awfully, awfully!"
	"No, he would not have approved," said Pierre, after reflection.What he would have approved of is our family life. He was always sonxious to find seemliness, happiness, and peace in everything, and should have been proud to let him see us. There now- you talk ofy absence, but you wouldn't believe what a special feeling I have forou after a separation...."
	"Yes, I should think..." Natasha began.
	"No, it's not that. I never leave off loving you. And one couldn'tove more, but this is something special.... Yes, of course-" he didot finish because their eyes meeting said the rest.
	"What nonsense it is," Natasha suddenly exclaimed, "aboutoneymoons, and that the greatest happiness is at first! On theontrary, now is the best of all. If only you did not go away! Doou remember how we quarreled? And it was always my fault. Alwaysine. And what we quarreled about- I don't even remember!"
	"Always about the same thing," said Pierre with a smile. "Jealo..."
	"Don't say it! I can't bear it!" Natasha cried, and her eyeslittered coldly and vindictively. "Did you see her?" she added, after pause.
	"No, and if I had I shouldn't have recognized her."
	They were silent for a while.
	"Oh, do you know? While you were talking in the study I wasooking at you," Natasha began, evidently anxious to disperse theloud that had come over them. "You are as like him as two peas-ike the boy." (She meant her little son.) "Oh, it's time to go toim.... The milk's come.... But I'm sorry to leave you."
	They were silent for a few seconds. Then suddenly turning to onenother at the same time they both began to speak. Pierre began withelf-satisfaction and enthusiasm, Natasha with a quiet, happy smile.aving interrupted one another they both stopped to let the otherontinue.
	"No. What did you say? Go on, go on."
	"No, you go on, I was talking nonsense," said Natasha.
	Pierre finished what he had begun. It was the sequel to hisomplacent reflections on his success in Petersburg. At that moment iteemed to him that he was chosen to give a new direction to thehole of Russian society and to the whole world.
	"I only wished to say that ideas that have great results arelways simple ones. My whole idea is that if vicious people are unitednd constitute a power, then honest folk must do the same. Nowhat's simple enough."
	"Yes."
	"And what were you going to say?"
	"I? Only nonsense."
	"But all the same?"
	"Oh nothing, only a trifle," said Natasha, smilingly still morerightly. "I only wanted to tell you about Petya: today nurse wasoming to take him from me, and he laughed, shut his eyes, and clungo me. I'm sure he thought he was hiding. Awfully sweet! There, nowe's crying. Well, good-by!" and she left the room.
	Meanwhile downstairs in young Nicholas Bolkonski's bedroom aittle lamp was burning as usual. (The boy was afraid of the darknd they could not cure him of it.) Dessalles slept propped up on fourillows and his Roman nose emitted sounds of rhythmic snoring.ittle Nicholas, who had just waked up in a cold perspiration, satp in bed and gazed before him with wide-open eyes. He had awaked from terrible dream. He had dreamed that he and Uncle Pierre, wearingelmets such as were depicted in his Plutarch, were leading a hugermy. The army was made up of white slanting lines that filled the airike the cobwebs that float about in autumn and which Dessalles calledes fils de la Vierge. In front was Glory, which was similar tohose threads but rather thicker. He and Pierre were borne alongightly and joyously, nearer and nearer to their goal. Suddenly thehreads that moved them began to slacken and become entangled and itrew difficult to move. And Uncle Nicholas stood before them in atern and threatening attitude.
	"Have you done this?" he said, pointing to some broken sealing waxnd pens. "I loved you, but I have orders from Arakcheev and will killhe first of you who moves forward." Little Nicholas turned to look atierre but Pierre was no longer there. In his place was his father-rince Andrew- and his father had neither shape nor form, but hexisted, and when little Nicholas perceived him he grew faint withove: he felt himself powerless, limp, and formless. His fatheraressed and pitied him. But Uncle Nicholas came nearer and nearero them. Terror seized young Nicholas and he awoke.
	"My father!" he thought. (Though there were two good portraits ofrince Andrew in the house, Nicholas never imagined him in humanorm.) "My father has been with me and caressed me. He approved ofe and of Uncle Pierre. Whatever he may tell me, I will do it.ucius Scaevola burned his hand. Why should not the same sort of thingappen to me? I know they want me to learn. And I will learn. Butomeday I shall have finished learning, and then I will doomething. I only pray God that something may happen to me such asappened to Plutarch's men, and I will act as they did. I will doetter. Everyone shall know me, love me, and be delighted with me!"nd suddenly his bosom heaved with sobs and he began to cry.
	"Are you ill?" he heard Dessalles' voice asking.
	"No," answered Nicholas, and lay back on his pillow.
	"He is good and kind and I am fond of him!" he thought of Dessalles.But Uncle Pierre! Oh, what a wonderful man he is! And my father?h, Father, Father! Yes, I will do something with which even heould be satisfied...."EP2	                              SECOND EPILOGUEEP2|CH1
	CHAPTER I
	History is the life of nations and of humanity. To seize and putnto words, to describe directly the life of humanity or even of aingle nation, appears impossible.
	The ancient historians all employed one and the same method toescribe and seize the apparently elusive- the life of a people.hey described the activity of individuals who ruled the people, andegarded the activity of those men as representing the activity of thehole nation.
	The question: how did individuals make nations act as they wishednd by what was the will of these individuals themselves guided? thencients met by recognizing a divinity which subjected the nationso the will of a chosen man, and guided the will of that chosen man sos to accomplish ends that were predestined.
	For the ancients these questions were solved by a belief in theirect participation of the Deity in human affairs.
	Modern history, in theory, rejects both these principles.
	It would seem that having rejected the belief of the ancients inan's subjection to the Deity and in a predetermined aim towardhich nations are led, modern history should study not theanifestations of power but the causes that produce it. But modernistory has not done this. Having in theory rejected the view heldy the ancients, it still follows them in practice.
	Instead of men endowed with divine authority and directly guidedy the will of God, modern history has given us either heroesndowed with extraordinary, superhuman capacities, or simply men ofery various kinds, from monarchs to journalists, who lead the masses.nstead of the former divinely appointed aims of the Jewish, Greek, oroman nations, which ancient historians regarded as representing therogress of humanity, modern history has postulated its own aims-he welfare of the French, German, or English people, or, in itsighest abstraction, the welfare and civilization of humanity ineneral, by which is usually meant that of the peoples occupying amall northwesterly portion of a large continent.
	Modern history has rejected the beliefs of the ancients withouteplacing them by a new conception, and the logic of the situation hasbliged the historians, after they had apparently rejected theivine authority of the kings and the "fate" of the ancients, to reachhe same conclusion by another road, that is, to recognize (1) nationsuided by individual men, and (2) the existence of a known aim tohich these nations and humanity at large are tending.
	At the basis of the works of all the modern historians from Gibbono Buckle, despite their seeming disagreements and the apparentovelty of their outlooks, lie those two old, unavoidable assumptions.
	In the first place the historian describes the activity ofndividuals who in his opinion have directed humanity (one historianonsiders only monarchs, generals, and ministers as being such men,hile another includes also orators, learned men, reformers,hilosophers, and poets). Secondly, it is assumed that the goal towardhich humanity is being led is known to the historians: to one of themhis goal is the greatness of the Roman, Spanish, or French realm;o another it is liberty, equality, and a certain kind of civilizationf a small corner of the world called Europe.
	In 1789 a ferment arises in Paris; it grows, spreads, and isxpressed by a movement of peoples from west to east. Several times itoves eastward and collides with a countermovement from the eastestward. In 1812 it reaches its extreme limit, Moscow, and then, withemarkable symmetry, a countermovement occurs from east to west,ttracting to it, as the first movement had done, the nations ofiddle Europe. The counter movement reaches the starting point ofhe first movement in the west- Paris- and subsides.
	During that twenty-year period an immense number of fields were leftntilled, houses were burned, trade changed its direction, millions ofen migrated, were impoverished, or were enriched, and millions ofhristian men professing the law of love of their fellows slew onenother.
	What does all this mean? Why did it happen? What made those peopleurn houses and slay their fellow men? What were the causes of thesevents? What force made men act so? These are the instinctive,lain, and most legitimate questions humanity asks itself when itncounters the monuments and tradition of that period.
	For a reply to these questions the common sense of mankind turnso the science of history, whose aim is to enable nations and humanityo know themselves.
	If history had retained the conception of the ancients it would haveaid that God, to reward or punish his people, gave Napoleon power andirected his will to the fulfillment of the divine ends, and thateply, would have been clear and complete. One might believe orisbelieve in the divine significance of Napoleon, but for anyoneelieving in it there would have been nothing unintelligible in theistory of that period, nor would there have been any contradictions.
	But modern history cannot give that reply. Science does not admithe conception of the ancients as to the direct participation of theeity in human affairs, and therefore history ought to give othernswers.
	Modern history replying to these questions says: you want to knowhat this movement means, what caused it, and what force producedhese events? Then listen:
	"Louis XIV was a very proud and self-confident man; he had suchnd such mistresses and such and such ministers and he ruled Franceadly. His descendants were weak men and they too ruled Franceadly. And they had such and such favorites and such and suchistresses. Moreover, certain men wrote some books at that time. Athe end of the eighteenth century there were a couple of dozen menn Paris who began to talk about all men being free and equal. Thisaused people all over France to begin to slash at and drown onenother. They killed the king and many other people. At that timehere was in France a man of genius- Napoleon. He conqueredverybody everywhere- that is, he killed many people because he was great genius. And for some reason he went to kill Africans, andilled them so well and was so cunning and wise that when heeturned to France he ordered everybody to obey him, and they allbeyed him. Having become an Emperor he again went out to killeople in Italy, Austria, and Prussia. And there too he killed a greatany. In Russia there was an Emperor, Alexander, who decided toestore order in Europe and therefore fought against Napoleon. In 1807e suddenly made friends with him, but in 1811 they again quarrelednd again began killing many people. Napoleon led six hundred thousanden into Russia and captured Moscow; then he suddenly ran away fromoscow, and the Emperor Alexander, helped by the advice of Stein andthers, united Europe to arm against the disturber of its peace. Allapoleon's allies suddenly became his enemies and their forcesdvanced against the fresh forces he raised. The Allies defeatedapoleon, entered Paris, forced Napoleon to abdicate, and sent himo the island of Elba, not depriving him of the title of Emperor andhowing him every respect, though five years before and one year laterhey all regarded him as an outlaw and a brigand. Then Louis XVIII,ho till then had been the laughingstock both of the French and thellies, began to reign. And Napoleon, shedding tears before his Olduards, renounced the throne and went into exile. Then the skillfultatesmen and diplomatists (especially Talleyrand, who managed toit down in a particular chair before anyone else and thereby extendedhe frontiers of France) talked in Vienna and by these conversationsade the nations happy or unhappy. Suddenly the diplomatists andonarchs nearly quarreled and were on the point of again orderingheir armies to kill one another, but just then Napoleon arrived inrance with a battalion, and the French, who had been hating him,mmediately all submitted to him. But the Allied monarchs were angryt this and went to fight the French once more. And they defeatedhe genius Napoleon and, suddenly recognizing him as a brigand, sentim to the island of St. Helena. And the exile, separated from theeloved France so dear to his heart, died a lingering death on thatock and bequeathed his great deeds to posterity. But in Europe aeaction occurred and the sovereigns once again all began to oppressheir subjects."
	It would be a mistake to think that this is ironic- a caricaturef the historical accounts. On the contrary it is a very mildxpression of the contradictory replies, not meeting the questions,hich all the historians give, from the compilers of memoirs and theistories of separate states to the writers of general histories andhe new histories of the culture of that period.
	The strangeness and absurdity of these replies arise from the facthat modern history, like a deaf man, answers questions no one hassked.
	If the purpose of history be to give a description of the movementf humanity and of the peoples, the first question- in the absencef a reply to which all the rest will be incomprehensible- is: what ishe power that moves peoples? To this, modern history laboriouslyeplies either that Napoleon was a great genius, or that Louis XIV wasery proud, or that certain writers wrote certain books.
	All that may be so and mankind is ready to agree with it, but its not what was asked. All that would be interesting if weecognized a divine power based on itself and always consistentlyirecting its nations through Napoleons, Louis-es, and writers; but weo not acknowledge such a power, and therefore before speaking aboutapoleons, Louis-es, and authors, we ought to be shown theonnection existing between these men and the movement of the nations.
	If instead of a divine power some other force has appeared, ithould be explained in what this new force consists, for the wholenterest of history lies precisely in that force.
	History seems to assume that this force is self-evident and known toveryone. But in spite of every desire to regard it as known, anyoneeading many historical works cannot help doubting whether this neworce, so variously understood by the historians themselves, is reallyuite well known to everybody.EP2|CH2
	CHAPTER II
	What force moves the nations?
	Biographical historians and historians of separate nationsnderstand this force as a power inherent in heroes and rulers. Inheir narration events occur solely by the will of a Napoleon, andlexander, or in general of the persons they describe. The answersiven by this kind of historian to the question of what force causesvents to happen are satisfactory only as long as there is but oneistorian to each event. As soon as historians of differentationalities and tendencies begin to describe the same event, theeplies they give immediately lose all meaning, for this force isnderstood by them all not only differently but often in quiteontradictory ways. One historian says that an event was produced byapoleon's power, another that it was produced by Alexander's, a thirdhat it was due to the power of some other person. Besides this,istorians of that kind contradict each other even in theirtatement as to the force on which the authority of some particularerson was based. Thiers, a Bonapartist, says that Napoleon's poweras based on his virtue and genius. Lanfrey, a Republican, says it wasased on his trickery and deception of the people. So the historiansf this class, by mutually destroying one another's positions, destroyhe understanding of the force which produces events, and furnish noeply to history's essential question.
	Writers of universal history who deal with all the nations seem toecognize how erroneous is the specialist historians' view of theorce which produces events. They do not recognize it as a powernherent in heroes and rulers, but as the resultant of aultiplicity of variously directed forces. In describing a war orhe subjugation of a people, a general historian looks for the causef the event not in the power of one man, but in the interaction ofany persons connected with the event.
	According to this view the power of historical personages,epresented as the product of many forces, can no longer, it wouldeem, be regarded as a force that itself produces events. Yet inost cases universal historians still employ the conception of powers a force that itself produces events, and treat it as their cause.n their exposition, an historic character is first the product of hisime, and his power only the resultant of various forces, and then hisower is itself a force producing events. Gervinus, Schlosser, andthers, for instance, at one time prove Napoleon to be a product ofhe Revolution, of the ideas of 1789 and so forth, and at anotherlainly say that the campaign of 1812 and other things they do notike were simply the product of Napoleon's misdirected will, andhat the very ideas of 1789 were arrested in their development byapoleon's caprice. The ideas of the Revolution and the general temperf the age produced Napoleon's power. But Napoleon's poweruppressed the ideas of the Revolution and the general temper of thege.
	This curious contradiction is not accidental. Not only does it occurt every step, but the universal historians' accounts are all madep of a chain of such contradictions. This contradiction occursecause after entering the field of analysis the universalistorians stop halfway.
	To find component forces equal to the composite or resultantorce, the sum of the components must equal the resultant. Thisondition is never observed by the universal historians, and so toxplain the resultant forces they are obliged to admit, in addition tohe insufficient components, another unexplained force affecting theesultant action.
	Specialist historians describing the campaign of 1813 or theestoration of the Bourbons plainly assert that these events wereroduced by the will of Alexander. But the universal historianervinus, refuting this opinion of the specialist historian, trieso prove that the campaign of 1813 and the restoration of the Bourbonsere due to other things beside Alexander's will- such as the activityf Stein, Metternich, Madame de Stael, Talleyrand, Fichtehateaubriand, and others. The historian evidently decomposeslexander's power into the components: Talleyrand, Chateaubriand,nd the rest- but the sum of the components, that is, the interactionsf Chateaubriand, Talleyrand, Madame de Stael, and the others,vidently does not equal the resultant, namely the phenomenon ofillions of Frenchmen submitting to the Bourbons. Thathateaubriand, Madame de Stael, and others spoke certain words tone another only affected their mutual relations but does notccount for the submission of millions. And therefore to explain howrom these relations of theirs the submission of millions of peopleesulted- that is, how component forces equal to one A gave aesultant equal to a thousand times A- the historian is againbliged to fall back on power- the force he had denied- and toecognize it as the resultant of the forces, that is, he has todmit an unexplained force acting on the resultant. And that is justhat the universal historians do, and consequently they not onlyontradict the specialist historians but contradict themselves.
	Peasants having no clear idea of the cause of rain, say, accordingo whether they want rain or fine weather: "The wind has blown thelouds away," or, "The wind has brought up the clouds." And in theame way the universal historians sometimes, when it pleases themnd fits in with their theory, say that power is the result of events,nd sometimes, when they want to prove something else, say thatower produces events.
	A third class of historians- the so-called historians of culture-ollowing the path laid down by the universal historians who sometimesccept writers and ladies as forces producing events- again takehat force to be something quite different. They see it in what isalled culture- in mental activity.
	The historians of culture are quite consistent in regard to theirrogenitors, the writers of universal histories, for if historicalvents may be explained by the fact that certain persons treated onenother in such and such ways, why not explain them by the fact thatuch and such people wrote such and such books? Of the immenseumber of indications accompanying every vital phenomenon, theseistorians select the indication of intellectual activity and say thathis indication is the cause. But despite their endeavors to provehat the cause of events lies in intellectual activity, only by areat stretch can one admit that there is any connection betweenntellectual activity and the movement of peoples, and in no casean one admit that intellectual activity controls people's actions,or that view is not confirmed by such facts as the very cruel murdersf the French Revolution resulting from the doctrine of the equalityf man, or the very cruel wars and executions resulting from thereaching of love.
	But even admitting as correct all the cunningly devised argumentsith which these histories are filled- admitting that nations areoverned by some undefined force called an idea- history's essentialuestion still remains unanswered, and to the former power of monarchsnd to the influence of advisers and other people introduced by theniversal historians, another, newer force- the idea- is added, theonnection of which with the masses needs explanation. It isossible to understand that Napoleon had power and so events occurred;ith some effort one may even conceive that Napoleon together withther influences was the cause of an event; but how a book, Le Contratocial, had the effect of making Frenchmen begin to drown onenother cannot be understood without an explanation of the causalexus of this new force with the event.
	Undoubtedly some relation exists between all who liveontemporaneously, and so it is possible to find some connectionetween the intellectual activity of men and their historicalovements, just as such a connection may be found between theovements of humanity and commerce, handicraft, gardening, or anythinglse you please. But why intellectual activity is considered by theistorians of culture to be the cause or expression of the wholeistorical movement is hard to understand. Only the followingonsiderations can have led the historians to such a conclusion: (1)hat history is written by learned men, and so it is natural andgreeable for them to think that the activity of their classupplies the basis of the movement of all humanity, just as aimilar belief is natural and agreeable to traders, agriculturists,nd soldiers (if they do not express it, that is merely becauseraders and soldiers do not write history), and (2) that spiritualctivity, enlightenment, civilization, culture, ideas, are allndistinct, indefinite conceptions under whose banner it is veryasy to use words having a still less definite meaning, and whichan therefore be readily introduced into any theory.
	But not to speak of the intrinsic quality of histories of thisind (which may possibly even be of use to someone for something)he histories of culture, to which all general histories tend more andore to approximate, are significant from the fact that aftereriously and minutely examining various religious, philosophic, andolitical doctrines as causes of events, as soon as they have toescribe an actual historic event such as the campaign of 1812 fornstance, they involuntarily describe it as resulting from an exercisef power- and say plainly that that was the result of Napoleon's will.peaking so, the historians of culture involuntarily contradicthemselves, and show that the new force they have devised does notccount for what happens in history, and that history can only bexplained by introducing a power which they apparently do notecognize.EP2|CH3
	CHAPTER III
	A locomotive is moving. Someone asks: "What moves it?" A peasantays the devil moves it. Another man says the locomotive moves becausets wheels go round. A third asserts that the cause of its movementies in the smoke which the wind carries away.
	The peasant is irrefutable. He has devised a complete explanation.o refute him someone would have to prove to him that there is noevil, or another peasant would have to explain to him that it isot the devil but a German, who moves the locomotive. Only then, as result of the contradiction, will they see that they are both wrong.ut the man who says that the movement of the wheels is the causeefutes himself, for having once begun to analyze he ought to go onnd explain further why the wheels go round; and till he has reachedhe ultimate cause of the movement of the locomotive in the pressuref steam in the boiler, he has no right to stop in his search forhe cause. The man who explains the movement of the locomotive byhe smoke that is carried back has noticed that the wheels do notupply an explanation and has taken the first sign that occurs toim and in his turn has offered that as an explanation.
	The only conception that can explain the movement of theocomotive is that of a force commensurate with the movement observed.
	The only conception that can explain the movement of the peopless that of some force commensurate with the whole movement of theeoples.
	Yet to supply this conception various historians take forces ofifferent kinds, all of which are incommensurate with the movementbserved. Some see it as a force directly inherent in heroes, as theeasant sees the devil in the locomotive; others as a forceesulting from several other forces, like the movement of theheels; others again as an intellectual influence, like the smoke thats blown away.
	So long as histories are written of separate individuals, whetheraesars, Alexanders, Luthers, or Voltaires, and not the histories ofll, absolutely all those who take part in an event, it is quitempossible to describe the movement of humanity without the conceptionf a force compelling men to direct their activity toward a certainnd. And the only such conception known to historians is that ofower.
	This conception is the one handle by means of which the materialf history, as at present expounded, can be dealt with, and anyone whoreaks that handle off, as Buckle did, without finding some otherethod of treating historical material, merely deprives himself of thene possible way of dealing with it. The necessity of the conceptionf power as an explanation of historical events is best demonstratedy the universal historians and historians of culture themselves,or they professedly reject that conception but inevitably haveecourse to it at every step.
	In dealing with humanity's inquiry, the science of history up to nows like money in circulation- paper money and coin. The biographiesnd special national histories are like paper money. They can besed and can circulate and fulfill their purpose without harm tonyone and even advantageously, as long as no one asks what is theecurity behind them. You need only forget to ask how the will oferoes produces events, and such histories as Thiers' will benteresting and instructive and may perhaps even possess a tinge ofoetry. But just as doubts of the real value of paper money ariseither because, being easy to make, too much of it gets made orecause people try to exchange it for gold, so also doubtsoncerning the real value of such histories arise either because tooany of them are written or because in his simplicity of heart someonenquires: by what force did Napoleon do this?- that is, wants toxchange the current paper money for the real gold of actualomprehension.
	The writers of universal histories and of the history of culture areike people who, recognizing the defects of paper money, decide toubstitute for it money made of metal that has not the specificravity of gold. It may indeed make jingling coin, but will do no morehan that. Paper money may deceive the ignorant, but nobody iseceived by tokens of base metal that have no value but merely jingle.s gold is gold only if it is serviceable not merely for exchangeut also for use, so universal historians will be valuable only whenhey can reply to history's essential question: what is power? Theniversal historians give contradictory replies to that question,hile the historians of culture evade it and answer something quiteifferent. And as counters of imitation gold can be used only among group of people who agree to accept them as gold, or among those whoo not know the nature of gold, so universal historians and historiansf culture, not answering humanity's essential question, serve asurrency for some purposes of their own, only in universities andmong the mass of readers who have a taste for what they call "seriouseading."EP2|CH4
	CHAPTER IV
	Having abandoned the conception of the ancients as to the divineubjection of the will of a nation to some chosen man and theubjection of that man's will to the Deity, history cannot withoutontradictions take a single step till it has chosen one of twohings: either a return to the former belief in the directntervention of the Deity in human affairs or a definite explanationf the meaning of the force producing historical events and termedpower."
	A return to the first is impossible, the belief has beenestroyed; and so it is essential to explain what is meant by power.
	Napoleon ordered an army to be raised and go to war. We are soccustomed to that idea and have become so used to it that theuestion: why did six hundred thousand men go to fight when Napoleonttered certain words, seems to us senseless. He had the power ando what he ordered was done.
	This reply is quite satisfactory if we believe that the power wasiven him by God. But as soon as we do not admit that, it becomesssential to determine what is this power of one man over others.
	It cannot be the direct physical power of a strong man over a weakne- a domination based on the application or threat of physicalorce, like the power of Hercules; nor can it be based on the effectf moral force, as in their simplicity some historians think who sayhat the leading figures in history are heroes, that is, men giftedith a special strength of soul and mind called genius. This powerannot be based on the predominance of moral strength, for, not toention heroes such as Napoleon about whose moral qualities opinionsiffer widely, history shows us that neither a Louis XI nor aetternich, who ruled over millions of people, had any particularoral qualities, but on the contrary were generally morally weakerhan any of the millions they ruled over.
	If the source of power lies neither in the physical nor in the moralualities of him who possesses it, it must evidently be looked forlsewhere- in the relation to the people of the man who wields theower.
	And that is how power is understood by the science of jurisprudence,hat exchange bank of history which offers to exchange history'snderstanding of power for true gold.
	Power is the collective will of the people transferred, by expressedr tacit consent, to their chosen rulers.
	In the domain of jurisprudence, which consists of discussions of how state and power might be arranged were it possible for all that toe arranged, it is all very clear; but when applied to history thatefinition of power needs explanation.
	The science of jurisprudence regards the state and power as thencients regarded fire- namely, as something existing absolutely.ut for history, the state and power are merely phenomena, just as forodern physics fire is not an element but a phenomenon.
	From this fundamental difference between the view held by historynd that held by jurisprudence, it follows that jurisprudence can tellinutely how in its opinion power should be constituted and whatower- existing immutably outside time- is, but to history's questionsbout the meaning of the mutations of power in time it can answerothing.
	If power be the collective will of the people transferred to theiruler, was Pugachev a representative of the will of the people? Ifot, then why was Napoleon I? Why was Napoleon III a criminal whene was taken prisoner at Boulogne, and why, later on, were thoseriminals whom he arrested?
	Do palace revolutions- in which sometimes only two or three peopleake part- transfer the will of the people to a new ruler? Innternational relations, is the will of the people also transferred toheir conqueror? Was the will of the Confederation of the Rhineransferred to Napoleon in 1806? Was the will of the Russian peopleransferred to Napoleon in 1809, when our army in alliance with therench went to fight the Austrians?
	To these questions three answers are possible:
	Either to assume (1) that the will of the people is alwaysnconditionally transferred to the ruler or rulers they have chosen,nd that therefore every emergence of a new power, every strugglegainst the power once appointed, should be absolutely regarded asn infringement of the real power; or (2) that the will of theeople is transferred to the rulers conditionally, under definitend known conditions, and to show that all limitations, conflicts, andven destructions of power result from a nonobservance by the rulersf the conditions under which their power was entrusted to them; or3) that the will of the people is delegated to the rulersonditionally, but that the conditions are unknown and indefinite, andhat the appearance of several authorities, their struggles andheir falls, result solely from the greater or lesser fulfillment byhe rulers of these unknown conditions on which the will of the peoples transferred from some people to others.
	And these are the three ways in which the historians do explainhe relation of the people to their rulers.
	Some historians- those biographical and specialist historianslready referred to- in their simplicity failing to understand theuestion of the meaning of power, seem to consider that the collectiveill of the people is unconditionally transferred to historicalersons, and therefore when describing some single state they assumehat particular power to be the one absolute and real power, andhat any other force opposing this is not a power but a violation ofower- mere violence.
	Their theory, suitable for primitive and peaceful periods ofistory, has the inconvenience- in application to complex and stormyeriods in the life of nations during which various powers ariseimultaneously and struggle with one another- that a Legitimististorian will prove that the National Convention, the Directory,nd Bonaparte were mere infringers of the true power, while aepublican and a Bonapartist will prove: the one that the Conventionnd the other that the Empire was the real power, and that all thethers were violations of power. Evidently the explanationsurnished by these historians being mutually contradictory can onlyatisfy young children.
	Recognizing the falsity of this view of history, another set ofistorians say that power rests on a conditional delegation of theill of the people to their rulers, and that historical leaders haveower only conditionally on carrying out the program that the willf the people has by tacit agreement prescribed to them. But what thisrogram consists in these historians do not say, or if they do theyontinually contradict one another.
	Each historian, according to his view of what constitutes a nation'srogress, looks for these conditions in the greatness, wealth,reedom, or enlightenment of citizens of France or some other country.ut not to mention the historians' contradictions as to the naturef this program- or even admitting that some one general program ofhese conditions exists- the facts of history almost always contradicthat theory. If the conditions under which power is entrustedonsist in the wealth, freedom, and enlightenment of the people, hows it that Louis XIV and Ivan the Terrible end their reignsranquilly, while Louis XVI and Charles I are executed by theireople? To this question historians reply that Louis XIV's activity,ontrary to the program, reacted on Louis XVI. But why did it noteact on Louis XIV or on Louis XV- why should it react just on LouisVI? And what is the time limit for such reactions? To these questionshere are and can be no answers. Equally little does this view explainhy for several centuries the collective will is not withdrawn fromertain rulers and their heirs, and then suddenly during a period ofifty years is transferred to the Convention, to the Directory, toapoleon, to Alexander, to Louis XVIII, to Napoleon again, toharles X, to Louis Philippe, to a Republican government, and toapoleon III. When explaining these rapid transfers of the people'sill from from one individual to another, especially in view ofnternational relations, conquests, and alliances, the historiansre obliged to admit that some of these transfers are not normalelegations of the people's will but are accidents dependent onunning, on mistakes, on craft, or on the weakness of a diplomatist, auler, or a party leader. So that the greater part of the events ofistory- civil wars, revolutions, and conquests- are presented byhese historians not as the results of free transferences of theeople's will, but as results of the ill-directed will of one orore individuals, that is, once again, as usurpations of power. And sohese historians also see and admit historical events which arexceptions to the theory.
	These historians resemble a botanist who, having noticed that somelants grow from seeds producing two cotyledons, should insist thatll that grows does so by sprouting into two leaves, and that thealm, the mushroom, and even the oak, which blossom into full growthnd no longer resemble two leaves, are deviations from the theory.
	Historians of the third class assume that the will of the peoples transferred to historic personages conditionally, but that theonditions are unknown to us. They say that historical personages haveower only because they fulfill the will of the people which haseen delegated to them.
	But in that case, if the force that moves nations lies not in theistoric leaders but in the nations themselves, what significance havehose leaders?
	The leaders, these historians tell us, express the will of theeople: the activity of the leaders represents the activity of theeople.
	But in that case the question arises whether all the activity of theeaders serves as an expression of the people's will or only some partf it. If the whole activity of the leaders serves as the expressionf the people's will, as some historians suppose, then all the detailsf the court scandals contained in the biographies of a Napoleon or Catherine serve to express the life of the nation, which isvident nonsense; but if it is only some particular side of thectivity of an historical leader which serves to express theeople's life, as other so-called "philosophical" historianselieve, then to determine which side of the activity of a leaderxpresses the nation's life, we have first of all to know in whathe nation's life consists.
	Met by this difficulty historians of that class devise some mostbscure, impalpable, and general abstraction which can cover allonceivable occurrences, and declare this abstraction to be the aim ofumanity's movement. The most usual generalizations adopted bylmost all the historians are: freedom, equality, enlightenment,rogress, civilization, and culture. Postulating some generalizations the goal of the movement of humanity, the historians study theen of whom the greatest number of monuments have remained: kings,inisters, generals, authors, reformers, popes, and journalists, tohe extent to which in their opinion these persons have promoted orindered that abstraction. But as it is in no way proved that theim of humanity does consist in freedom, equality, enlightenment, orivilization, and as the connection of the people with the rulersnd enlighteners of humanity is only based on the arbitrary assumptionhat the collective will of the people is always transferred to theen whom we have noticed, it happens that the activity of the millionsho migrate, burn houses, abandon agriculture, and destroy one anotherever is expressed in the account of the activity of some dozen peopleho did not burn houses, practice agriculture, or slay their fellowreatures.
	History proves this at every turn. Is the ferment of the peoplesf the west at the end of the eighteenth century and their driveastward explained by the activity of Louis XIV, XV, and XVI, theiristresses and ministers, and by the lives of Napoleon, Rousseau,iderot, Beaumarchais, and others?
	Is the movement of the Russian people eastward to Kazan andiberia expressed by details of the morbid character of Ivan theerrible and by his correspondence with Kurbski?
	Is the movement of the peoples at the time of the Crusades explainedy the life and activity of the Godfreys and the Louis-es and theiradies? For us that movement of the peoples from west to east, withouteaders, with a crowd of vagrants, and with Peter the Hermit,emains incomprehensible. And yet more incomprehensible is theessation of that movement when a rational and sacred aim for therusade- the deliverance of Jerusalem- had been clearly defined byistoric leaders. Popes, kings, and knights incited the peoples toree the Holy Land; but the people did not go, for the unknown causehich had previously impelled them to go no longer existed. Theistory of the Godfreys and the Minnesingers can evidently not coverhe life of the peoples. And the history of the Godfreys and theinnesingers has remained the history of Godfreys and Minnesingers,ut the history of the life of the peoples and their impulses hasemained unknown.
	Still less does the history of authors and reformers explain to ushe life of the peoples.
	The history of culture explains to us the impulses and conditions ofife and thought of a writer or a reformer. We learn that Luther had aot temper and said such and such things; we learn that Rousseau wasuspicious and wrote such and such books; but we do not learn whyfter the Reformation the peoples massacred one another, nor whyuring the French Revolution they guillotined one another.
	If we unite both these kinds of history, as is done by the newestistorians, we shall have the history of monarchs and writers, but nothe history of the life of the peoples.EP2|CH5
	CHAPTER V
	The life of the nations is not contained in the lives of a fewen, for the connection between those men and the nations has not beenound. The theory that this connection is based on the transference ofhe collective will of a people to certain historical personages is anypothesis unconfirmed by the experience of history.
	The theory of the transference of the collective will of theeople to historic persons may perhaps explain much in the domain ofurisprudence and be essential for its purposes, but in itspplication to history, as soon as revolutions, conquests, or civilars occur- that is, as soon as history begins- that theory explainsothing.
	The theory seems irrefutable just because the act of transference ofhe people's will cannot be verified, for it never occurred.
	Whatever happens and whoever may stand at the head of affairs, theheory can always say that such and such a person took the leadecause the collective will was transferred to him.
	The replies this theory gives to historical questions are like theeplies of a man who, watching the movements of a herd of cattle andaying no attention to the varying quality of the pasturage inifferent parts of the field, or to the driving of the herdsman,hould attribute the direction the herd takes to what animal happenso be at its head.
	"The herd goes in that direction because the animal in front leadst and the collective will of all the other animals is vested inhat leader." This is what historians of the first class say- thoseho assume the unconditional transference of the people's will.
	"If the animals leading the herd change, this happens because theollective will of all the animals is transferred from one leader tonother, according to whether the animal is or is not leading themn the direction selected by the whole herd." Such is the replyistorians who assume that the collective will of the people iselegated to rulers under conditions which they regard as known. (Withhis method of observation it often happens that the observer,nfluenced by the direction he himself prefers, regards those aseaders who, owing to the people's change of direction, are noonger in front, but on one side, or even in the rear.)
	"If the animals in front are continually changing and theirection of the whole herd is constantly altered, this is becausen order to follow a given direction the animals transfer their willo the animals that have attracted our attention, and to study theovements of the herd we must watch the movements of all the prominentnimals moving on all sides of the herd." So say the third class ofistorians who regard all historical persons, from monarchs toournalists, as the expression of their age.
	The theory of the transference of the will of the people to historicersons is merely a paraphrase- a restatement of the question in otherords.
	What causes historical events? Power. What is power? Power is theollective will of the people transferred to one person. Under whatondition is the will of the people delegated to one person? Onondition that that person expresses the will of the whole people.hat is, power is power: in other words, power is a word the meaningf which we do not understand.
	If the realm of human knowledge were confined to abstract reasoning,hen having subjected to criticism the explanation of "power" thaturidical science gives us, humanity would conclude that power iserely a word and has no real existence. But to understand phenomenaan has, besides abstract reasoning, experience by which he verifiesis reflections. And experience tells us that power is not merely aord but an actually existing phenomenon.
	Not to speak of the fact that no description of the collectivectivity of men can do without the conception of power, thexistence of power is proved both by history and by observingontemporary events.
	Whenever an event occurs a man appears or men appear, by whoseill the event seems to have taken place. Napoleon III issues a decreend the French go to Mexico. The King of Prussia and Bismarck issueecrees and an army enters Bohemia. Napoleon I issues a decree andn army enters Russia. Alexander I gives a command and the Frenchubmit to the Bourbons. Experience shows us that whatever event occurst is always related to the will of one or of several men who haveecreed it.
	The historians, in accord with the old habit of acknowledging divinentervention in human affairs, want to see the cause of events inhe expression of the will of someone endowed with power, but thatupposition is not confirmed either by reason or by experience.
	On the one side reflection shows that the expression of a man'sill- his words- are only part of the general activity expressed in anvent, as for instance in a war or a revolution, and so withoutssuming an incomprehensible, supernatural force- a miracle- oneannot admit that words can be the immediate cause of the movements ofillions of men. On the other hand, even if we admitted that wordsould be the cause of events, history shows that the expression of theill of historical personages does not in most cases produce anyffect, that is to say, their commands are often not executed, andometimes the very opposite of what they order occurs.
	Without admitting divine intervention in the affairs of humanitye cannot regard "power" as the cause of events.
	Power, from the standpoint of experience, is merely the relationhat exists between the expression of someone's will and the executionf that will by others.
	To explain the conditions of that relationship we must firststablish a conception of the expression of will, referring it toan and not to the Deity.
	If the Deity issues a command, expresses His will, as ancientistory tells us, the expression of that will is independent of timend is not caused by anything, for the Divinity is not controlled byn event. But speaking of commands that are the expression of the willf men acting in time and in relation to one another, to explain theonnection of commands with events we must restore: (1) theondition of all that takes place: the continuity of movement inime both of the events and of the person who commands, and (2) thenevitability of the connection between the person commanding andhose who execute his command.EP2|CH6
	CHAPTER VI
	Only the expression of the will of the Deity, not dependent on time,an relate to a whole series of events occurring over a period ofears or centuries, and only the Deity, independent of everything, cany His sole will determine the direction of humanity's movement; butan acts in time and himself takes part in what occurs.
	Reinstating the first condition omitted, that of time, we see thato command can be executed without some preceding order having beeniven rendering the execution of the last command possible.
	No command ever appears spontaneously, or itself covers a wholeeries of occurrences; but each command follows from another, andever refers to a whole series of events but always to one moment onlyf an event.
	When, for instance, we say that Napoleon ordered armies to go toar, we combine in one simultaneous expression a whole series ofonsecutive commands dependent one on another. Napoleon could not haveommanded an invasion of Russia and never did so. Today he ordereduch and such papers to be written to Vienna, to Berlin, and toetersburg; tomorrow such and such decrees and orders to the army, theleet, the commissariat, and so on and so on- millions of commands,hich formed a whole series corresponding to a series of eventshich brought the French armies into Russia.
	If throughout his reign Napoleon gave commands concerning annvasion of England and expended on no other undertaking so muchime and effort, and yet during his whole reign never once attemptedo execute that design but undertook an expedition into Russia, withhich country he considered it desirable to be in alliance (aonviction he repeatedly expressed)- this came about because hisommands did not correspond to the course of events in the first case,ut did so correspond in the latter.
	For an order to be certainly executed, it is necessary that a manhould order what can be executed. But to know what can and whatannot be executed is impossible, not only in the case of Napoleon'snvasion of Russia in which millions participated, but even in theimplest event, for in either case millions of obstacles may ariseo prevent its execution. Every order executed is always one of anmmense number unexecuted. All the impossible orders inconsistent withhe course of events remain unexecuted. Only the possible ones getinked up with a consecutive series of commands corresponding to aeries of events, and are executed.
	Our false conception that an event is caused by a command whichrecedes it is due to the fact that when the event has taken place andut of thousands of others those few commands which were consistentith that event have been executed, we forget about the others thatere not executed because they could not be. Apart from that, thehief source of our error in this matter is due to the fact that inhe historical accounts a whole series of innumerable, diverse, andetty events, such for instance as all those which led the Frenchrmies to Russia, is generalized into one event in accord with theesult produced by that series of events, and corresponding withhis generalization the whole series of commands is also generalizednto a single expression of will.
	We say that Napoleon wished to invade Russia and invaded it. Ineality in all Napoleon's activity we never find anything resemblingn expression of that wish, but find a series of orders, orxpressions of his will, very variously and indefinitely directed.mid a long series of unexecuted orders of Napoleon's one series,or the campaign of 1812, was carried out- not because those ordersiffered in any way from the other, unexecuted orders but because theyoincided with the course of events that led the French army intoussia; just as in stencil work this or that figure comes out notecause the color was laid on from this side or in that way, butecause it was laid on from all sides over the figure cut in thetencil.
	So that examining the relation in time of the commands to thevents, we find that a command can never be the cause of the event,ut that a certain definite dependence exists between the two.
	To understand in what this dependence consists it is necessary toeinstate another omitted condition of every command proceeding notrom the Deity but from a man, which is, that the man who gives theommand himself takes part in
	This relation of the commander to those he commands is just whats called power. This relation consists in the following:
	For common action people always unite in certain combinations, inhich regardless of the difference of the aims set for the commonction, the relation between those taking part in it is always theame.
	Men uniting in these combinations always assume such relationsoward one another that the larger number take a more direct share,nd the smaller number a less direct share, in the collective actionor which they have combined.
	Of all the combinations in which men unite for collective action onef the most striking and definite examples is an army.
	Every army is composed of lower grades of the service- the ranknd file- of whom there are always the greatest number; of the nextigher military rank- corporals and noncommissioned officers of whomhere are fewer, and of still-higher officers of whom there aretill fewer, and so on to the highest military command which isoncentrated in one person.
	A military organization may be quite correctly compared to a cone,f which the base with the largest diameter consists of the rank andile; the next higher and smaller section of the cone consists ofhe next higher grades of the army, and so on to the apex, the pointf which will represent the commander in chief.
	The soldiers, of whom there are the most, form the lower sectionf the cone and its base. The soldier himself does the stabbing,acking, burning, and pillaging, and always receives orders forhese actions from men above him; he himself never gives an order. Theoncommissioned officers (of whom there are fewer) perform thection itself less frequently than the soldiers, but they already giveommands. An officer still less often acts directly himself, butommands still more frequently. A general does nothing but command theroops, indicates the objective, and hardly ever uses a weaponimself. The commander in chief never takes direct part in thection itself, but only gives general orders concerning the movementf the mass of the troops. A similar relation of people to one anothers seen in every combination of men for common activity- ingriculture, trade, and every administration.
	And so without particularly analyzing all the contiguous sections of cone and of the ranks of an army, or the ranks and positions inny administrative or public business whatever from the lowest tohe highest, we see a law by which men, to take associated action,ombine in such relations that the more directly they participate inerforming the action the less they can command and the moreumerous they are, while the less their direct participation in thection itself, the more they command and the fewer of them therere; rising in this way from the lowest ranks to the man at the top,ho takes the least direct share in the action and directs hisctivity chiefly to commanding.
	This relation of the men who command to those they command is whatonstitutes the essence of the conception called power.
	Having restored the condition of time under which all eventsccur, find that a command is executed only when it is related to aorresponding series of events. Restoring the essential condition ofelation between those who command and those who execute, we find thaty the very nature of the case those who command take the smallestart in the action itself and that their activity is exclusivelyirected to commanding.EP2|CH7
	CHAPTER VII
	When an event is taking place people express their opinions andishes about it, and as the event results from the collective activityf many people, some one of the opinions or wishes expressed is sureo be fulfilled if but approximately. When one of the opinionsxpressed is fulfilled, that opinion gets connected with the events a command preceding it.
	Men are hauling a log. Each of them expresses his opinion as toow and where to haul it. They haul the log away, and it happenshat this is done as one of them said. He ordered it. There we haveommand and power in their primary form. The man who worked mostith his hands could not think so much about what he was doing, oreflect on or command what would result from the common activity;hile the man who commanded more would evidently work less with hisands on account of his greater verbal activity.
	When some larger concourse of men direct their activity to aommon aim there is a yet sharper division of those who, because theirctivity is given to directing and commanding, take less less partn the direct work.
	When a man works alone he always has a certain set of reflectionshich as it seems to him directed his past activity, justify hisresent activity, and guide him in planning his future actions. Justhe same is done by a concourse of people, allowing those who do notake a direct part in the activity to devise considerations,ustifications, and surmises concerning their collective activity.
	For reasons known or unknown to us the French began to drown andill one another. And corresponding to the event its justificationppears in people's belief that this was necessary for the welfaref France, for liberty, and for equality. People ceased to kill onenother, and this event was accompanied by its justification in theecessity for a centralization of power, resistance to Europe, ando on. Men went from the west to the east killing their fellow men,nd the event was accompanied by phrases about the glory of France,he baseness of England, and so on. History shows us that theseustifications of the events have no common sense and are allontradictory, as in the case of killing a man as the result ofecognizing his rights, and the killing of millions in Russia forhe humiliation of England. But these justifications have a veryecessary significance in their own day.
	These justifications release those who produce the events from moralesponsibility. These temporary aims are like the broom fixed in frontf a locomotive to clear the snow from the rails in front: theylear men's moral responsibilities from their path.
	Without such justification there would be no reply to the simplestuestion that presents itself when examining each historical event.ow is it that millions of men commit collective crimes- make war,ommit murder, and so on?
	With the present complex forms of political and social life inurope can any event that is not prescribed, decreed, or ordered byonarchs, ministers, parliaments, or newspapers be imagined? Ishere any collective action which cannot find its justification inolitical unity, in patriotism, in the balance of power, or inivilization? So that every event that occurs inevitably coincidesith some expressed wish and, receiving a justification, presentstself as the result of the will of one man or of several men.
	In whatever direction a ship moves, the flow of the waves it cutsill always be noticeable ahead of it. To those on board the shiphe movement of those waves will be the only perceptible motion.
	Only by watching closely moment by moment the movement of thatlow and comparing it with the movement of the ship do we convinceurselves that every bit of it is occasioned by the forward movementf the ship, and that we were led into error by the fact that weurselves were imperceptibly moving.
	We see the same if we watch moment by moment the movement ofistorical characters (that is, re-establish the inevitableondition of all that occurs- the continuity of movement in time)nd do not lose sight of the essential connection of historicalersons with the masses.
	When the ship moves in one direction there is one and the sameave ahead of it, when it turns frequently the wave ahead of it alsourns frequently. But wherever it may turn there always will be theave anticipating its movement.
	Whatever happens it always appears that just that event was foreseennd decreed. Wherever the ship may go, the rush of water which neitherirects nor increases its movement foams ahead of it, and at aistance seems to us not merely to move of itself but to govern thehip's movement also.
	Examining only those expressions of the will of historical personshich, as commands, were related to events, historians have assumedhat the events depended on those commands. But examining the eventshemselves and the connection in which the historical persons stood tohe people, we have found that they and their orders were dependent onvents. The incontestable proof of this deduction is that, howeverany commands were issued, the event does not take place unlesshere are other causes for it, but as soon as an event occurs- be ithat it may- then out of all the continually expressed wishes ofifferent people some will always be found which by their meaningnd their time of utterance are related as commands to the events.
	Arriving at this conclusion we can reply directly and positivelyo these two essential questions of history:
	(1) What is power?
	(2) What force produces the movement of the nations?
	(1) Power is the relation of a given person to other individuals, inhich the more this person expresses opinions, predictions, andustifications of the collective action that is performed, the less isis participation in that action.
	(2) The movement of nations is caused not by power, nor byntellectual activity, nor even by a combination of the two asistorians have supposed, but by the activity of all the people whoarticipate in the events, and who always combine in such a way thathose taking the largest direct share in the event take onhemselves the least responsibility and vice versa.
	Morally the wielder of power appears to cause the event;hysically it is those who submit to the power. But as the moralctivity is inconceivable without the physical, the cause of the events neither in the one nor in the other but in the union of the two.
	Or in other words, the conception of a cause is inapplicable tohe phenomena we are examining.
	In the last analysis we reach the circle of infinity- that finalimit to which in every domain of thought man's reason arrives if its not playing with the subject. Electricity produces heat, heatroduces electricity. Atoms attract each other and atoms repel onenother.
	Speaking of the interaction of heat and electricity and of atoms, weannot say why this occurs, and we say that it is so because it isnconceivable otherwise, because it must be so and that it is a law.he same applies to historical events. Why war and revolution occur weo not know. We only know that to produce the one or the other action,eople combine in a certain formation in which they all take part, ande say that this is so because it is unthinkable otherwise, or inther words that it is a law.EP2|CH8
	CHAPTER VIII
	If history dealt only with external phenomena, the establishmentf this simple and obvious law would suffice and we should haveinished our argument. But the law of history relates to man. Aarticle of matter cannot tell us that it does not feel the law ofttraction or repulsion and that that law is untrue, but man, who ishe subject of history, says plainly: I am free and am therefore notubject to the law.
	The presence of the problem of man's free will, thoughnexpressed, is felt at every step of history.
	All seriously thinking historians have involuntarily encounteredhis question. All the contradictions and obscurities of history andhe false path historical science has followed are due solely to theack of a solution of that question.
	If the will of every man were free, that is, if each man could acts he pleased, all history would be a series of disconnectedncidents.
	If in a thousand years even one man in a million could act freely,hat is, as he chose, it is evident that one single free act of thatan's in violation of the laws governing human action would destroyhe possibility of the existence of any laws for the whole ofumanity.
	If there be a single law governing the actions of men, free willannot exist, for then man's will is subject to that law.
	In this contradiction lies the problem of free will, which from mostncient times has occupied the best human minds and from mostncient times has been presented in its whole tremendous significance.
	The problem is that regarding man as a subject of observation fromhatever point of view- theological, historical, ethical, orhilosophic- we find a general law of necessity to which he (likell that exists) is subject. But regarding him from within ourselvess what we are conscious of, we feel ourselves to be free.
	This consciousness is a source of self-cognition quite apart fromnd independent of reason. Through his reason man observes himself,ut only through consciousness does he know himself.
	Apart from consciousness of self no observation or application ofeason is conceivable.
	To understand, observe, and draw conclusions, man must first ofll be conscious of himself as living. A man is only conscious ofimself as a living being by the fact that he wills, that is, isonscious of his volition. But his will- which forms the essence ofis life- man recognizes (and can but recognize) as free.
	If, observing himself, man sees that his will is always directedy one and the same law (whether he observes the necessity of takingood, using his brain, or anything else) he cannot recognize thisever-varying direction of his will otherwise than as a limitationf it. Were it not free it could not be limited. A man's will seems toim to be limited just because he is not conscious of it except asree.
	You say: I am not and am not free. But I have lifted my hand and lett fall. Everyone understands that this illogical reply is anrrefutable demonstration of freedom.
	That reply is the expression of a consciousness that is notubject to reason.
	If the consciousness of freedom were not a separate andndependent source of self-consciousness it would be subject toeasoning and to experience, but in fact such subjection does notxist and is inconceivable.
	A series of experiments and arguments proves to every man that he,s an object of observation, is subject to certain laws, and manubmits to them and never resists the laws of gravity ormpermeability once he has become acquainted with them. But the sameeries of experiments and arguments proves to him that the completereedom of which he is conscious in himself is impossible, and thatis every action depends on his organization, his character, and theotives acting upon him; yet man never submits to the deductions ofhese experiments and arguments. Having learned from experiment andrgument that a stone falls downwards, a man indubitably believes thisnd always expects the law that he has learned to be fulfilled.
	But learning just as certainly that his will is subject to laws,e does not and cannot believe this.
	However often experiment and reasoning may show a man that under theame conditions and with the same character he will do the samehing as before, yet when under the same conditions and with theame character he approaches for the thousandth time the action thatlways ends in the same way, he feels as certainly convinced as beforehe experiment that he can act as he pleases. Every man, savage orage, however incontestably reason and experiment may prove to himhat it is impossible to imagine two different courses of action inrecisely the same conditions, feels that without this irrationalonception (which constitutes the essence of freedom) he cannotmagine life. He feels that however impossible it may be, it is so,or without this conception of freedom not only would he be unableo understand life, but he would be unable to live for a singleoment.
	He could not live, because all man's efforts, all his impulses toife, are only efforts to increase freedom. Wealth and poverty, famend obscurity, power and subordination, strength and weakness,ealth and disease, culture and ignorance, work and leisure, repletionnd hunger, virtue and vice, are only greater or lesser degrees ofreedom.
	A man having no freedom cannot be conceived of except as deprived ofife.
	If the conception of freedom appears to reason to be a senselessontradiction like the possibility of performing two actions at onend the same instant of time, or of an effect without a cause, thatnly proves that consciousness is not subject to reason.
	This unshakable, irrefutable consciousness of freedom,ncontrolled by experiment or argument, recognized by all thinkers andelt by everyone without exception, this consciousness without whicho conception of man is possible constitutes the other side of theuestion.
	Man is the creation of an all-powerful, all-good, and all-seeingod. What is sin, the conception of which arises from theonsciousness of man's freedom? That is a question for theology.
	The actions of men are subject to general immutable laws expressedn statistics. What is man's responsibility to society, the conceptionf which results from the conception of freedom? That is a questionor jurisprudence.
	Man's actions proceed from his innate character and the motivescting upon him. What is conscience and the perception of right androng in actions that follows from the consciousness of freedom?hat is a question for ethics.
	Man in connection with the general life of humanity appearsubject to laws which determine that life. But the same man apart fromhat connection appears to free. How should the past life of nationsnd of humanity be regarded- as the result of the free, or as theesult of the constrained, activity of man? That is a question foristory.
	Only in our self-confident day of the popularization of knowledge-hanks to that most powerful engine of ignorance, the diffusion ofrinted matter- has the question of the freedom of will been put on level on which the question itself cannot exist. In our time theajority of so-called advanced people- that is, the crowd ofgnoramuses- have taken the work of the naturalists who deal withne side of the question for a solution of the whole problem.
	They say and write and print that the soul and freedom do not exist,or the life of man is expressed by muscular movements and muscularovements are conditioned by the activity of the nerves; the soulnd free will do not exist because at an unknown period of time weprang from the apes. They say this, not at all suspecting thathousands of years ago that same law of necessity which with suchrdor they are now trying to prove by physiology and comparativeoology was not merely acknowledged by all the religions and all thehinkers, but has never been denied. They do not see that the rolef the natural sciences in this matter is merely to serve as annstrument for the illumination of one side of it. For the facthat, from the point of view of observation, reason and the will areerely secretions of the brain, and that man following the general laway have developed from lower animals at some unknown period ofime, only explains from a fresh side the truth admitted thousandsf years ago by all the religious and philosophic theories- thatrom the point of view of reason man is subject to the law ofecessity; but it does not advance by a hair's breadth the solution ofhe question, which has another, opposite, side, based on theonsciousness of freedom.
	If men descended from the apes at an unknown period of time, that iss comprehensible as that they were made from a handful of earth at certain period of time (in the first case the unknown quantity ishe time, in the second case it is the origin); and the question ofow man's consciousness of freedom is to be reconciled with the law ofecessity to which he is subject cannot be solved by comparativehysiology and zoology, for in a frog, a rabbit, or an ape, we canbserve only the muscular nervous activity, but in man we observeonsciousness as well as the muscular and nervous activity.
	The naturalists and their followers, thinking they can solve thisuestion, are like plasterers set to plaster one side of the wallsf a church who, availing themselves of the absence of the chiefuperintendent of the work, should in an access of zeal plaster overhe windows, icons, woodwork, and still unbuttressed walls, and shoulde delighted that from their point of view as plasterers, everythings now so smooth and regular.EP2|CH9
	CHAPTER IX
	For the solution of the question of free will or inevitability,istory has this advantage over other branches of knowledge in whichhe question is dealt with, that for history this question does notefer to the essence of man's free will but its manifestation in theast and under certain conditions.
	In regard to this question, history stands to the other sciencess experimental science stands to abstract science.
	The subject for history is not man's will itself but ourresentation of it.
	And so for history, the insoluble mystery presented by thencompatibility of free will and inevitability does not exist as itoes for theology, ethics, and philosophy. History surveys aresentation of man's life in which the union of these twoontradictions has already taken place.
	In actual life each historic event, each human action, is verylearly and definitely understood without any sense ofontradiction, although each event presents itself as partly freend partly compulsory.
	To solve the question of how freedom and necessity are combinednd what constitutes the essence of these two conceptions, thehilosophy of history can and should follow a path contrary to thataken by other sciences. Instead of first defining the conceptionsf freedom and inevitability in themselves, and then ranging thehenomena of life under those definitions, history should deduce aefinition of the conception of freedom and inevitability themselvesrom the immense quantity of phenomena of which it is cognizant andhat always appear dependent on these two elements.
	Whatever presentation of the activity of many men or of anndividual we may consider, we always regard it as the result partlyf man's free will and partly of the law of inevitability.
	Whether we speak of the migration of the peoples and thencursions of the barbarians, or of the decrees of Napoleon III, or ofomeone's action an hour ago in choosing one direction out ofeveral for his walk, we are unconscious of any contradiction. Theegree of freedom and inevitability governing the actions of theseeople is clearly defined for us.
	Our conception of the degree of freedom often varies according toifferences in the point of view from which we regard the event, butvery human action appears to us as a certain combination of freedomnd inevitability. In every action we examine we see a certain measuref freedom and a certain measure of inevitability. And always the morereedom we see in any action the less inevitability do we perceive,nd the more inevitability the less freedom.
	The proportion of freedom to inevitability decreases and increasesccording to the point of view from which the action is regarded,ut their relation is always one of inverse proportion.
	A sinking man who clutches at another and drowns him; or a hungryother exhausted by feeding her baby, who steals some food; or a manrained to discipline who on duty at the word of command kills aefenseless man- seem less guilty, that is, less free and more subjecto the law of necessity, to one who knows the circumstances in whichhese people were placed, and more free to one who does not knowhat the man was himself drowning, that the mother was hungry, thathe soldier was in the ranks, and so on. Similarly a man who committed murder twenty years ago and has since lived peaceably and harmlesslyn society seems less guilty and his action more due to the law ofnevitability, to someone who considers his action after twentyears have elapsed than to one who examined it the day after it wasommitted. And in the same way every action of an insane, intoxicated,r highly excited man appears less free and more inevitable to one whonows the mental condition of him who committed the action, andeems more free and less inevitable to one who does not know it. Inll these cases the conception of freedom is increased or diminishednd the conception of compulsion is correspondingly decreased orncreased, according to the point of view from which the action isegarded. So that the greater the conception of necessity themaller the conception of freedom and vice versa.
	Religion, the common sense of mankind, the science of jurisprudence,nd history itself understand alike this relation between necessitynd freedom.
	All cases without exception in which our conception of freedom andecessity is increased and diminished depend on three considerations:
	(1) The relation to the external world of the man who commits theeeds.
	(2) His relation to time.
	(3) His relation to the causes leading to the action.
	The first consideration is the clearness of our perception of thean's relation to the external world and the greater or lesserlearness of our understanding of the definite position occupied byhe man in relation to everything coexisting with him. This is whatakes it evident that a drowning man is less free and more subjecto necessity than one standing on dry ground, and that makes thections of a man closely connected with others in a thicklyopulated district, or of one bound by family, official, or businessuties, seem certainly less free and more subject to necessity thanhose of a man living in solitude and seclusion.
	If we consider a man alone, apart from his relation to everythinground him, each action of his seems to us free. But if we see hiselation to anything around him, if we see his connection withnything whatever- with a man who speaks to him, a book he reads,he work on which he is engaged, even with the air he breathes orhe light that falls on the things about him- we see that each ofhese circumstances has an influence on him and controls at least someide of his activity. And the more we perceive of these influences theore our conception of his freedom diminishes and the more ouronception of the necessity that weighs on him increases.
	The second consideration is the more or less evident time relationf the man to the world and the clearness of our perception of thelace the man's action occupies in time. That is the ground whichakes the fall of the first man, resulting in the production of theuman race, appear evidently less free than a man's entry intoarriage today. It is the reason why the life and activity of peopleho lived centuries ago and are connected with me in time cannoteem to me as free as the life of a contemporary, the consequencesf which are still unknown to me.
	The degree of our conception of freedom or inevitability dependsn this respect on the greater or lesser lapse of time between theerformance of the action and our judgment of it.
	If I examine an act I performed a moment ago in approximately theame circumstances as those I am in now, my action appears to mendoubtedly free. But if I examine an act performed a month ago,hen being in different circumstances, I cannot help recognizinghat if that act had not been committed much that resulted from it-ood, agreeable, and even essential- would not have taken place. If reflect on an action still more remote, ten years ago or more,hen the consequences of my action are still plainer to me and Iind it hard to imagine what would have happened had that action noteen performed. The farther I go back in memory, or what is the samehing the farther I go forward in my judgment, the more doubtfulecomes my belief in the freedom of my action.
	In history we find a very similar progress of convictiononcerning the part played by free will in the general affairs ofumanity. A contemporary event seems to us to be indubitably the doingf all the known participants, but with a more remote event we alreadyee its inevitable results which prevent our considering anything elseossible. And the farther we go back in examining events the lessrbitrary do they appear.
	The Austro-Prussian war appears to us undoubtedly the result ofhe crafty conduct of Bismarck, and so on. The Napoleonic wars stilleem to us, though already questionably, to be the outcome of theireroes' will. But in the Crusades we already see an event occupyingts definite place in history and without which we cannot imaginehe modern history of Europe, though to the chroniclers of therusades that event appeared as merely due to the will of certaineople. In regard to the migration of the peoples it does not enternyone's head today to suppose that the renovation of the Europeanorld depended on Attila's caprice. The farther back in history thebject of our observation lies, the more doubtful does the free willf those concerned in the event become and the more manifest the lawf inevitability.
	The third consideration is the degree to which we apprehend thatndless chain of causation inevitably demanded by reason, in whichach phenomenon comprehended, and therefore man's every action, mustave its definite place as a result of what has gone before and as aause of what will follow.
	The better we are acquainted with the physiological,sychological, and historical laws deduced by observation and by whichan is controlled, and the more correctly we perceive thehysiological, psychological, and historical causes of the action, andhe simpler the action we are observing and the less complex theharacter and mind of the man in question, the more subject tonevitability and the less free do our actions and those of othersppear.
	When we do not at all understand the cause of an action, whether arime, a good action, or even one that is simply nonmoral, wescribe a greater amount of freedom to it. In the case of a crime weost urgently demand the punishment for such an act; in the case of virtuous act we rate its merit most highly. In an indifferent casee recognize in it more individuality, originality, andndependence. But if even one of the innumerable causes of the acts known to us we recognize a certain element of necessity and areess insistent on punishment for the crime, or the acknowledgment ofhe merit of the virtuous act, or the freedom of the apparentlyriginal action. That a criminal was reared among male factorsitigates his fault in our eyes. The self-sacrifice of a father orother, or self-sacrifice with the possibility of a reward, is moreomprehensible than gratuitous self-sacrifice, and therefore seemsess deserving of sympathy and less the result of free will. Theounder of a sect or party, or an inventor, impresses us less whene know how or by what the way was prepared for his activity. If weave a large range of examples, if our observation is constantlyirected to seeking the correlation of cause and effect in people'sctions, their actions appear to us more under compulsion and lessree the more correctly we connect the effects with the causes. Ife examined simple actions and had a vast number of such actions underbservation, our conception of their inevitability would be stillreater. The dishonest conduct of the son of a dishonest father, theisconduct of a woman who had fallen into bad company, a drunkard'selapse into drunkenness, and so on are actions that seem to us lessree the better we understand their cause. If the man whose actions were considering is on a very low stage of mental development, like ahild, a madman, or a simpleton- then, knowing the causes of the actnd the simplicity of the character and intelligence in question, weee so large an element of necessity and so little free will that asoon as we know the cause prompting the action we can foretell theesult.
	On these three considerations alone is based the conception ofrresponsibility for crimes and the extenuating circumstances admittedy all legislative codes. The responsibility appears greater or lessccording to our greater or lesser knowledge of the circumstances inhich the man was placed whose action is being judged, and accordingo the greater or lesser interval of time between the commission ofhe action and its investigation, and according to the greater oresser understanding of the causes that led to the action.EP2|CH10
	CHAPTER X
	Thus our conception of free will and inevitability graduallyiminishes or increases according to the greater or lesseronnection with the external world, the greater or lesser remotenessf time, and the greater or lesser dependence on the causes inelation to which we contemplate a man's life.
	So that if we examine the case of a man whose connection with thexternal world is well known, where the time between the action andts examination is great, and where the causes of the action areost accessible, we get the conception of a maximum of inevitabilitynd a minimum of free will. If we examine a man little dependent onxternal conditions, whose action was performed very recently, and theauses of whose action are beyond our ken, we get the conception of minimum of inevitability and a maximum of freedom.
	In neither case- however we may change our point of view, howeverlain we may make to ourselves the connection between the man andhe external world, however inaccessible it may be to us, however longr short the period of time, however intelligible orncomprehensible the causes of the action may be- can we ever conceiveither complete freedom or complete necessity.
	(1) To whatever degree we may imagine a man to be exempt from thenfluence of the external world, we never get a conception ofreedom in space. Every human action is inevitably conditioned by whaturrounds him and by his own body. I lift my arm and let it fall. Myction seems to me free; but asking myself whether I could raise myrm in every direction, I see that I raised it in the direction inhich there was least obstruction to that action either from thingsround me or from the construction of my own body. I chose one outf all the possible directions because in it there were fewestbstacles. For my action to be free it was necessary that it shouldncounter no obstacles. To conceive of a man being free we mustmagine him outside space, which is evidently impossible.
	(2) However much we approximate the time of judgment to the timef the deed, we never get a conception of freedom in time. For if Ixamine an action committed a second ago I must still recognize its not being free, for it is irrevocably linked to the moment at whicht was committed. Can I lift my arm? I lift it, but ask myself:ould I have abstained from lifting my arm at the moment that haslready passed? To convince myself of this I do not lift it the nextoment. But I am not now abstaining from doing so at the firstoment when I asked the question. Time has gone by which I could notetain, the arm I then lifted is no longer the same as the arm I nowefrain from lifting, nor is the air in which I lifted it the samehat now surrounds me. The moment in which the first movement was mades irrevocable, and at that moment I could make only one movement, andhatever movement I made would be the only one. That I did not lift myrm a moment later does not prove that I could have abstained fromifting it then. And since I could make only one movement at thatingle moment of time, it could not have been any other. To imagine its free, it is necessary to imagine it in the present, on the boundaryetween the past and the future- that is, outside time, which ismpossible.
	(3) However much the difficulty of understanding the causes may bencreased, we never reach a conception of complete freedom, that is,n absence of cause. However inaccessible to us may be the cause ofhe expression of will in any action, our own or another's, theirst demand of reason is the assumption of and search for a cause,or without a cause no phenomenon is conceivable. I raise my arm toerform an action independently of any cause, but my wish to performn action without a cause is the cause of my action.
	But even if- imagining a man quite exempt from all influences,xamining only his momentary action in the present, unevoked by anyause- we were to admit so infinitely small a remainder ofnevitability as equaled zero, we should even then not have arrived athe conception of complete freedom in man, for a being uninfluenced byhe external world, standing outside of time and independent of cause,s no longer a man.
	In the same way we can never imagine the action of a man quiteevoid of freedom and entirely subject to the law of inevitability.
	(1) However we may increase our knowledge of the conditions of spacen which man is situated, that knowledge can never be complete, forhe number of those conditions is as infinite as the infinity ofpace. And therefore so long as not all the conditions influencing menre defined, there is no complete inevitability but a certaineasure of freedom remains.
	(2) However we may prolong the period of time between the actione are examining and the judgment upon it, that period will be finite,hile time is infinite, and so in this respect too there can nevere absolute inevitability.
	(3) However accessible may be the chain of causation of anyction, we shall never know the whole chain since it is endless, ando again we never reach absolute inevitability.
	But besides this, even if, admitting the remaining minimum ofreedom to equal zero, we assumed in some given case- as fornstance in that of a dying man, an unborn babe, or an idiot- completebsence of freedom, by so doing we should destroy the veryonception of man in the case we are examining, for as soon as theres no freedom there is also no man. And so the conception of thection of a man subject solely to the law of inevitability without anylement of freedom is just as impossible as the conception of aan's completely free action.
	And so to imagine the action of a man entirely subject to the law ofnevitability without any freedom, we must assume the knowledge ofn infinite number of space relations, an infinitely long period ofime, and an infinite series of causes.
	To imagine a man perfectly free and not subject to the law ofnevitability, we must imagine him all alone, beyond space, beyondime, and free from dependence on cause.
	In the first case, if inevitability were possible without freedom wehould have reached a definition of inevitability by the laws ofnevitability itself, that is, a mere form without content.
	In the second case, if freedom were possible without inevitabilitye should have arrived at unconditioned freedom beyond space, time,nd cause, which by the fact of its being unconditioned andnlimited would be nothing, or mere content without form.
	We should in fact have reached those two fundamentals of which man'shole outlook on the universe is constructed- the incomprehensiblessence of life, and the laws defining that essence.
	Reason says: (1) space with all the forms of matter that give itisibility is infinite, and cannot be imagined otherwise. (2) Times infinite motion without a moment of rest and is unthinkabletherwise. (3) The connection between cause and effect has noeginning and can have no end.
	Consciousness says: (1) I alone am, and all that exists is but me,onsequently I include space. (2) I measure flowing time by theixed moment of the present in which alone I am conscious of myself asiving, consequently I am outside time. (3) I am beyond cause, for Ieel myself to be the cause of every manifestation of my life.
	Reason gives expression to the laws of inevitability.onsciousness gives expression to the essence of freedom.
	Freedom not limited by anything is the essence of life, in man'sonsciousness. Inevitability without content is man's reason in itshree forms.
	Freedom is the thing examined. Inevitability is what examines.reedom is the content. Inevitability is the form.
	Only by separating the two sources of cognition, related to onenother as form to content, do we get the mutually exclusive andeparately incomprehensible conceptions of freedom and inevitability.
	Only by uniting them do we get a clear conception of man's life.
	Apart from these two concepts which in their union mutually definene another as form and content, no conception of life is possible.
	All that we know of the life of man is merely a certain relationf free will to inevitability, that is, of consciousness to the lawsf reason.
	All that we know of the external world of nature is only a certainelation of the forces of nature to inevitability, or of the essencef life to the laws of reason.
	The great natural forces lie outside us and we are not consciousf them; we call those forces gravitation, inertia, electricity,nimal force, and so on, but we are conscious of the force of lifen man and we call that freedom.
	But just as the force of gravitation, incomprehensible in itself butelt by every man, is understood by us only to the extent to whiche know the laws of inevitability to which it is subject (from theirst knowledge that all bodies have weight, up to Newton's law), sooo the force of free will, incomprehensible in itself but of whichveryone is conscious, is intelligible to us only in as far as we knowhe laws of inevitability to which it is subject (from the fact thatvery man dies, up to the knowledge of the most complex economic andistoric laws).
	All knowledge is merely a bringing of this essence of life under theaws of reason.
	Man's free will differs from every other force in that man isirectly conscious of it, but in the eyes of reason it in no wayiffers from any other force. The forces of gravitation,lectricity, or chemical affinity are only distinguished from onenother in that they are differently defined by reason. Just so theorce of man's free will is distinguished by reason from the otherorces of nature only by the definition reason gives it. Freedom,part from necessity, that is, apart from the laws of reason thatefine it, differs in no way from gravitation, or heat, or the forcehat makes things grow; for reason, it is only a momentary undefinableensation of life.
	And as the undefinable essence of the force moving the heavenlyodies, the undefinable essence of the forces of heat and electricity,r of chemical affinity, or of the vital force, forms the content ofstronomy, physics, chemistry, botany, zoology, and so on, just in theame way does the force of free will form the content of history.ut just as the subject of every science is the manifestation ofhis unknown essence of life while that essence itself can only be theubject of metaphysics, even the manifestation of the force of freeill in human beings in space, in time, and in dependence on causeorms the subject of history, while free will itself is the subject ofetaphysics.
	In the experimental sciences what we know we call the laws ofnevitability, what is unknown to us we call vital force. Vitalorce is only an expression for the unknown remainder over and abovehat we know of the essence of life.
	So also in history what is known to us we call laws ofnevitability, what is unknown we call free will. Free will is foristory only an expression for the unknown remainder of what we knowbout the laws of human life.EP2|CH11
	CHAPTER XI
	History examines the manifestations of man's free will in connectionith the external world in time and in dependence on cause, that is,t defines this freedom by the laws of reason, and so history is acience only in so far as this free will is defined by those laws.
	The recognition of man's free will as something capable ofnfluencing historical events, that is, as not subject to laws, is theame for history as the recognition of a free force moving theeavenly bodies would be for astronomy.
	That assumption would destroy the possibility of the existence ofaws, that is, of any science whatever. If there is even a single bodyoving freely, then the laws of Kepler and Newton are negatived and noonception of the movement of the heavenly bodies any longer exists.f any single action is due to free will, then not a single historicalaw can exist, nor any conception of historical events.
	For history, lines exist of the movement of human wills, one endf which is hidden in the unknown but at the other end of which aonsciousness of man's will in the present moves in space, time, andependence on cause.
	The more this field of motion spreads out before our eyes, theore evident are the laws of that movement. To discover and definehose laws is the problem of history.
	From the standpoint from which the science of history now regardsts subject on the path it now follows, seeking the causes of eventsn man's freewill, a scientific enunciation of those laws ismpossible, for however man's free will may be restricted, as soons we recognize it as a force not subject to law, the existence of lawecomes impossible.
	Only by reducing this element of free will to the infinitesimal,hat is, by regarding it as an infinitely small quantity, can weonvince ourselves of the absolute inaccessibility of the causes,nd then instead of seeking causes, history will take the discovery ofaws as its problem.
	The search for these laws has long been begun and the new methods ofhought which history must adopt are being worked out simultaneouslyith the self-destruction toward which- ever dissecting and dissectinghe causes of phenomena- the old method of history is moving.
	All human sciences have traveled along that path. Arriving atnfinitesimals, mathematics, the most exact of sciences, abandonshe process of analysis and enters on the new process of thentegration of unknown, infinitely small, quantities. Abandoning theonception of cause, mathematics seeks law, that is, the propertyommon to all unknown, infinitely small, elements.
	In another form but along the same path of reflection the otherciences have proceeded. When Newton enunciated the law of gravitye did not say that the sun or the earth had a property of attraction;e said that all bodies from the largest to the smallest have theroperty of attracting one another, that is, leaving aside theuestion of the cause of the movement of the bodies, he expressedhe property common to all bodies from the infinitely large to thenfinitely small. The same is done by the natural sciences: leavingside the question of cause, they seek for laws. History stands on theame path. And if history has for its object the study of the movementf the nations and of humanity and not the narration of episodes inhe lives of individuals, it too, setting aside the conception ofause, should seek the laws common to all the inseparablynterconnected infinitesimal elements of free will.EP2|CH12
	CHAPTER XII
	From the time the law of Copernicus was discovered and proved, theere recognition of the fact that it was not the sun but the earthhat moves sufficed to destroy the whole cosmography of thencients. By disproving that law it might have been possible to retainhe old conception of the movements of the bodies, but withoutisproving it, it would seem impossible to continue studying thetolemaic worlds. But even after the discovery of the law ofopernicus the Ptolemaic worlds were still studied for a long time.
	From the time the first person said and proved that the number ofirths or of crimes is subject to mathematical laws, and that thisr that mode of government is determined by certain geographical andconomic conditions, and that certain relations of population tooil produce migrations of peoples, the foundations on which historyad been built were destroyed in their essence.
	By refuting these new laws the former view of history might haveeen retained; but without refuting them it would seem impossible toontinue studying historic events as the results of man's free will.or if a certain mode of government was established or certainigrations of peoples took place in consequence of such and sucheographic, ethnographic, or economic conditions, then the free willf those individuals who appear to us to have established that mode ofovernment or occasioned the migrations can no longer be regarded ashe cause.
	And yet the former history continues to be studied side by side withhe laws of statistics, geography, political economy, comparativehilology, and geology, which directly contradict its assumptions.
	The struggle between the old views and the new was long andtubbornly fought out in physical philosophy. Theology stood onuard for the old views and accused the new of violating revelation.ut when truth conquered, theology established itself just as firmlyn the new foundation.
	Just as prolonged and stubborn is the struggle now proceedingetween the old and the new conception of history, and theology in theame way stands on guard for the old view, and accuses the new view ofubverting revelation.
	In the one case as in the other, on both sides the struggle provokesassion and stifles truth. On the one hand there is fear and regretor the loss of the whole edifice constructed through the ages, on thether is the passion for destruction.
	To the men who fought against the rising truths of physicalhilosophy, it seemed that if they admitted that truth it wouldestroy faith in God, in the creation of the firmament, and in theiracle of Joshua the son of Nun. To the defenders of the laws ofopernicus and Newton, to Voltaire for example, it seemed that theaws of astronomy destroyed religion, and he utilized the law ofravitation as a weapon against religion.
	Just so it now seems as if we have only to admit the law ofnevitability, to destroy the conception of the soul, of good andvil, and all the institutions of state and church that have beenuilt up on those conceptions.
	So too, like Voltaire in his time, uninvited defenders of the law ofnevitability today use that law as a weapon against religion,hough the law of inevitability in history, like the law of Copernicusn astronomy, far from destroying, even strengthens the foundationn which the institutions of state and church are erected.
	As in the question of astronomy then, so in the question ofistory now, the whole difference of opinion is based on theecognition or nonrecognition of something absolute, serving as theeasure of visible phenomena. In astronomy it was the immovabilityf the earth, in history it is the independence of personality- freeill.
	As with astronomy the difficulty of recognizing the motion of thearth lay in abandoning the immediate sensation of the earth'sixity and of the motion of the planets, so in history theifficulty of recognizing the subjection of personality to the laws ofpace, time, and cause lies in renouncing the direct feeling of thendependence of one's own personality. But as in astronomy the newiew said: "It is true that we do not feel the movement of thearth, but by admitting its immobility we arrive at absurdity, whiley admitting its motion (which we do not feel) we arrive at laws,"o also in history the new view says: "It is true that we are notonscious of our dependence, but by admitting our free will werrive at absurdity, while by admitting our dependence on the externalorld, on time, and on cause, we arrive at laws."
	In the first case it was necessary to renounce the consciousnessf an unreal immobility in space and to recognize a motion we didot feel; in the present case it is similarly necessary to renounce freedom that does not exist, and to recognize a dependence ofhich we are not conscious.
	                             -THE END-